Our Right to Bear Arms Does Not Come Without Rules
The issue of gun safety and arguments over interpretations of the Second Amendment are currently at the forefront of American politics. At this time, violence wrought at the hands of individuals with guns, particularly assault rifles, occurs in the United States with terrifying frequency.In 2018 alone, there were more than 340 mass shootings (four or more victims involved) in the United States. Over 40,000 people were killed last year by guns. Gun-related deaths are the second leading cause of death for children in the U.S., and 54% of women killed by their partners died because of a gun. With those numbers, America joins five other countries that make up more than half of all gun-related deaths in the world.In actual fact, the argument over gun rights is less about the Second Amendment and more about profit maximization for gun manufacturers. Their lobbying arm, the National Rifle Association, has shrewdly used the Second Amendment as a cover for their greed. More and more Americans, however, are unwilling to sacrifice the safety of our children so gun manufacturers can make more money. I am among them. While the Second Amendment, just like every other Amendment in our Bill of Rights, must remain sacrosanct, our right to bear arms does not come without rules, regulations, human decency, or common sense. The second and third words in the Second Amendment, after all, are “well-regulated.”
As president I would support:
Eliminating the sale of assault rifles and semi-automatic weapons
Banning bump stocks and high capacity magazines
Strict control of gun use among children and access to guns among children
Required universal background checks, including at gun shows
Mandatory waiting periods for all gun dealers, including gun shows and sporting retailers
Reinstatement of Obama era restrictions on the ability of the mentally ill to purchase a gun
Child safety locks on all guns
Passage of Extreme Risk Protection Order Laws nationwide, allowing family members and law enforcement to seek court permission to temporarily remove guns from a person in danger of harming himself or others
Removing current limits on the Center for Disease Control’s (CDC) ability to track and record gun ownership numbers in America (vital information which helps in researching the overwhelming amount of gun deaths and underlying causes)
Gun licenses should involve more complete coursework,training, and requirements – including age restrictions and periodic renewal -- along the same lines as licenses to drive a car. This, to me, is common sense. A car is not intended as an instrument of death, and yet because death is possible, we train drivers extensively. A gun is an instrument of death, yet we do not train gun owners. Furthermore, more people died from gun deaths than car deaths in 2017. Proper licensing isn’t just common sense – it’s common decency.
As your president, I would also encourage research into the relationship between pharmaceutical use and suicidal/homicidal behavior, especially among youth.More than anything else, I feel that as president, I could make a moral argument for the cultivation of greater respect for life, in our lives. The cultivation of love and respect for others is perhaps the most powerful gun safety measure, and I would pursue it with all my heart.
‍
Child Advocacy
Climate Crisis
Crime Prevention
Criminal Justice
Democracy at Risk
Education
Food
Health Care
Immigration
LGBTQ Rights
Mass Incarceration
National Security  Peace-Building
National Service
Native American Justice
Racial Reconciliation  Healing
Reproductive Rights
Social Security
The Economy
Veterans
Women’s Rights
All Issues
Updates directly from our team
Lets Create This.
This campaign is about forging a new political possibility in America. It’s about all of us working together to create a rising tide of citizen activism and activation. It’s not just about electing a candidate. Its about you....your power....and your world.
Heading
SIGN UP TO RECEIVE Mobile alerts
