Immigration
We are a nation of immigrants, and we will always be a nation of immigrants. We need to re-examine our immigration policies to provide care and respect for those who come here. America, at its best, is a welcoming community, and we need to live up to our image, instead of tarnishing it.
Scapegoating immigrants, particularly Mexicans and Central Americans, is a deliberate dehumanization technique. Dehumanizing others has always been a common technique of the demagogue. This is not the first time dehumanization has reared its head in our nation, and we must stand up against it now as other generations stood up against it in their time. The hardening of the American heart is far more dangerous than the softening of our borders.
In fields ranging from the arts to science to academia, immigrants are among the highest contributors of any subpopulation whether measured culturally, academically, or economically. Children born of immigrants are more more likely to go to college and get a degree and less likely to live in poverty. In fact, studies have shown that as recently as 2016, immigrants contributed around $2 trillion to our GDP. And rather than competing with U.S. workers, research has shown their skills tend to compliment them.
Undocumented immigrants also contribute to Medicare and Social Security -- without reaping many of its benefits. As recently as 2010, research shows undocumented immigrants paid $13 billion into Social Security but only received $1 billion in services. And they paid over $35 billion more into Medicare than they withdrew between 2000 and 2011. They also pay over $11 billion a year in state and local taxes.
Seeking Refuge
Seeking asylum is not a crime; it is a statutory right. Yet people seeking asylum on the southern border of the United States are being scapegoated as criminals, their children deceitfully taken from their arms with no plan as to how they will be returned. These tactics flagrantly violate American law, which mandates that most anyone who sets foot in the United States has full constitutional protection here. These asylum-seekers have been grossly denied fair protection.
The modern immigrant is chasing the same dream of a better life that lured the ancestors of every American who isn’t descended from either enslaved persons brought over from Africa or Native Americans. Even the language many tend to use in describing undocumented immigrants - calling them “illegal,” or “aliens," — is a means of dehumanizing the very people this nation was designed to cherish.
Our Borders
Forcibly separating parents from their children is state-sponsored kidnapping, and traumatizing children by placing them in detainment camps is collective child abuse.
My Approach
I support legislative reforms that includes a full path to citizenship for undocumented immigrants who do not have serious criminal background issues. I would also work to reduce the cost of naturalization and increase resources to help people navigate that process more easily.
I will work to overturn the three- and ten-year re-entry bars. Many people who would otherwise qualify for green card status due to a relationship with a citizen or permanent resident are in a heart-wrenching scenario if they leave to apply for a green card in their native country (as is currently required). They are subsequently not allowed to re-enter the United States for three or ten years, even if they are married to a U.S. citizen. They can be separated from their families - for abiding by our laws! This whole scenario traps people in undocumented status. I will work to overturn this unnecessary hardship.
Children brought into the United States by their parents should not be punished for now being here. I fully support our DACA. Our dreamers represent the best about our future. I would also work to expand protections and naturalization to all undocumented immigrants who were brought here as children, regardless of their current age. They came here through no fault of their own, and many are, in fact, unaware that they are undocumented.
My administration will reduce the record number of detainees currently under extended DHS and ICE control. I would work to close private detention centers and family detention centers. There are far more humane options that have been proven to work.
I will speed up our process of allowing asylum seekers to come here. I believe we need to also stop forcing them to stay across the border before being processed. I would work to fund and authorize vast increases in Immigration Judges to move through our backlog of asylum seekers and other related cases.
I will expand protections for LGBTQ immigrants and asylum seekers, who experience discrimination here, as well as in their countries of origin.
I will work to assure all constitutional protections and due process are available to undocumented immigrants when it comes to deportation issues.
I will work to make affordable health care available to all of our families, whether they are documented or not..
I will increase border security intelligently through electronic surveillance and more patrol agents, rather than an ineffective and expensive wall.
I will seek a path to citizenship for all law-abiding, productive immigrants living in the United States.
Civilized Path
I will push for legislative reforms that include a full path to citizenship for undocumented immigrants who do not have serious criminal background issues. The cost of naturalization must also be reduced and resources increased to help people navigate that process more easily and humanely.
Civilized Path to Citizenship. Provide a timely, ethical, transparent and straightforward path to citizenship for all law-abiding, productive immigrants living in the United States.
Overturn the “three- and ten-year re-entry bar.” Many people who would otherwise qualify for green card status, due to a relationship with a citizen or permanent resident, are in a heart-wrenching scenario because they first have to leave to apply and wait for a green card in their native country (as is currently required). They are subsequently not allowed to re-enter the United States for three or ten years, even if they are married to a U.S. citizen. They can be separated from their families despite abiding by our laws. This scenario traps people in undocumented limbo and this unnecessary hardship must be overturned.
Support for DREAMERS. Children brought into the United States by their parents should not be punished. Working to expand protections and naturalization to all undocumented immigrants who were brought here as children, regardless of their current age, will also be a priority. They came here through no fault of their own, and many are, in fact, unaware that they are undocumented. DREAMERS, who are covered under DACA, have lived in America most of their lives and deserve our support.
Reduce Number of Detainees. Reduce the record number of detainees currently under extended Department of Homeland Security (DHS) and Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) control. Private detention centers and family detention centers should be closed as there are far more humane options that have been proven to work.
End Family Separation.The Federal government has a moral responsibility to keep families together. For those that have been torn apart by the current administration, we must take immediate action to reunite children with their families.
Speed-Up Processing. For the benefit of the U.S. and asylum seekers alike, we must speed-up the process so our government can determine the validity of an asylum claim. It is necessary to fund and authorize a vast increase in immigration judges to adjudicate the backlog of asylum seekers and other related cases. As an example, asylum seekers at the southern border should not be forced to stay across the border before being processed.
LGBTQ Expansion Protection. LGBTQ immigrants and asylum seekers who experience discrimination here, as well as in their countries of origin, should receive expanded protection.
Guarantee Constitutional Protections. Ensure that due process and constitutional protections are available to undocumented immigrants when it comes to deportation issues.
Access to Health Care. Make affordable health care available to all families, whether they are documented or not.
Real Border Security. Increase border security intelligently through electronic surveillance and more patrol agents, rather than an ineffective and expensive wall.
A core American value is that we are open to "huddled masses yearning to breathe free," and the withdrawal of our commitment to that value is a danger to everything we stand for as a nation. Legal immigration - including asylum-seeking - is core to our American identity. As president, I will preside over a psychological and emotional as well as a legal and governmental rededication to that principle. It is those who systematically oppress the immigrant, not the immigrants themselves, who are a threat to who we are.
‍
‍
Child Advocacy
Climate Crisis
Crime Prevention
Criminal Justice
Democracy at Risk
Education
Food
Gun Safety
Health Care
LGBTQ Rights
Mass Incarceration
National Security  Peace-Building
National Service
Native American Justice
Racial Reconciliation  Healing
Reproductive Rights
Social Security
The Economy
Veterans
Women’s Rights
All Issues
Updates directly from our team
Lets Create This.
This campaign is about forging a new political possibility in America. It’s about all of us working together to create a rising tide of citizen activism and activation. It’s not just about electing a candidate. Its about you....your power....and your world.
Heading
SIGN UP TO RECEIVE Mobile alerts
EXPLORE
My StoryIssuesEventsVideosConnectPressBlogStoreDonate
GET IN TOUCH
Press InquiriesContact UsVolunteerWork With Us
EnglishEspañol
PAID FOR BY MARIANNE WILLIAMSON FOR PRESIDENT
Privacy Policy
 
