OPPOSING TRADE PRACTICES THAT UNDERMINE NATIONAL SECURITY:
President Donald J. Trumpaddressedglobal overcapacity and unfair trade practicesin the steel and aluminum industries by announcinga 25 percent tariff on steel imports and 10 percent tariff on aluminum imports.
President Trump took action to protect America’s critical steel and aluminum industries, which were harmed by unfair trade practices and global excess capacity. 
The President exercised his authority to impose a 25 percent global tariff on steel imports and a 10 percent global tariff on aluminum imports in order to protect our national security.  
The tariffs on steel and aluminum are anticipated to reduce imports to levels needed for domestic industries to achieve long-term viability.
As a result, these industries will be able to re-open closed mills, sustain a skilled workforce, and maintain or increase production.
The strengthening of our domestic steel and aluminum industries reduces our reliance on foreign producers.
PROMOTING FAIR AND RECIPROCAL TRADE:
President Trump putAmerica first in trade so American workers arent put at a disadvantage.
One of President Trump’s first actions was to withdraw the United States from the Trans-Pacific Partnership, advancing his agenda to protect American workers.
The Trump Administration began renegotiations of trade agreements that contribute to the U.S. trade deficit and harmed American workers.
Renegotiations of the North American Free Trade Agreementare still underway to modernize the deal so that all countries benefit.
President Trump worked to bring foreign investment back to the United States so more goods are made in America by American workers.
South Korean companies announced 64 projects that will invest more than $17 billion in the U.S.over four years and will purchase $58 billion in goods and services.
Foxconn announced itsinvestment of$10 billion in Wisconsin to build a factory that will employ thousands of workers directly, and up to 22,000 workers indirectly.
Toyota and Mazda announced a $1.6 billion investment that will go toward anew manufacturing plant in the U.S.,creatingan estimated 4,000 jobs.
At the White House, Broadcom Limited announced they were moving their headquarters back to the United States, bringing potentially $20 billion in annual revenue.
President Trump worked to promote the sale of more American products abroad.
President Trump and King Salman of Saudi Arabia oversaw the signing of a historic $400 billion in deals between U.S. and Saudi companies.
The Trump Administration made enforcement of U.S. trade laws a top priority and has already made significant progress.
To defend U.S. national security interests, President Trump blocked a foreign company from acquiring a U.S. business for only the fourth time in history.
Since President Trump was sworn into office, the Department of Commerce has initiated 79 antidumping and countervailing duties (AD/CVD) investigations.
The U.S. Trade Representative (USTR) self-initiated a Section 301 investigation into whether Chinese policies, acts, and practices related to technology transfer, licensing, and intellectual property are unreasonable or discriminatory. This is the first use of Section 301 since 2001.
President Trump delivered on his promise to roll back the Obama Administration’s bad deal with Cuba, which benefitted the Cuban regime at the expense of the Cuban people.
The Treasury Department and State Departmentputnew sanction rules to channel economic activity away from the Cuban government, particularly the military, and towards the people of Cuba.
PRESERVINGAMERICAN COMPETITIVENESS:
President Donald J. Trump tookaction to address Chinese policies and practices that are harming American innovation.
The President directed his Administration to consider a range of actions to respond to China’s acts, policies, and practices involving the unfair and harmful acquisition of U.S. technology.
The Trump Administration proposed adding 25 percent additional tariffs on certain products that are supported by China’s unfair industrial policy.
Sectors subject to the proposed tariffs will include aerospace, information communication technology, and machinery.
The U.S. Trade Representative (USTR) confronted China’s discriminatory technology licensing practices through a World Trade Organization (WTO) dispute proceeding.
INVESTIGATINGTHREATS TO AMERICAN INNOVATION
In August, the Trump Administration launched an investigation under Section 301 of the Trade Act of 1974 into Chinese acts, policies, and practices related to technology transfer, intellectual property, and innovation.
This was the first Section 301 investigation since 2013.
The U.S. Trade Representative (USTR) confronted Chinas discriminatory technology licensing practices through a World Trade Organization (WTO) dispute proceeding.
USTR led an extensive investigation based on a thorough analysis of evidence and comments received from academics, think tanks, law firms, trade associations, and American companies and workers.
The investigation concluded that China forces U.S. companies seeking to license technologies to Chinese entities to do so on non-market based terms.
China imposes contractual restrictions on the licensing of intellectual property and foreign technology into their country, but does not put the same restrictions on contracts between two Chinese enterprises.
The investigation concluded that China directs and unfairly facilitates investments and acquisitions to generate large-scale technology transfers from U.S. companies to Chinese entities.
A Chinese government-backed fund helped Apex Technologies Co., a Chinese investment consortium, acquire a U.S. computer-printer maker which had previously sued Apex over patent infringement.
The investigation concluded that China conducts and supports cyber intrusions into U.S. companies to access their sensitive commercial information, such as trade secrets.
In 2014, the U.S charged five Chinese military hackers for cyber-esponiage committed against U.S. corporations and a labor organization for commercial advantage.
An interagency analysis estimated that Chinas unfair acts, policies, and practices caused tens of billions in dollars in damages to the United States each year.
CONFRONTING UNFAIR TRADE:
President Trump has made clear that his Administration will confront unfair trade practices that harm American commerce.
Since taking office, President Trump has sought to confront unfair trade practices that have harmed American commerce for far too long.
The President’s Administration conducted 82 antidumping and countervailing duty investigations in 2017.
This was a 58 percent increase in investigations over 2016.
In January, the President announced new safeguard tariffs on imported large residential washing machines and solar cells.
The Trump Administration successfully litigated WTO disputes targeting unfair trade practices and protected our right to enact fair trade laws.
In February 2018, USTR won a WTO compliance challenge against Chinas unfair antidumping and countervailing duties on U.S. poultry exports, and China announced the termination of those duties.
In November 2017, the United States won a WTO dispute regarding Indonesias unfair import licensing regime restricting U.S. agricultural exports.
In October 2017, a WTO compliance panel found that U.S. tuna labeling rules designed to inform consumers about safe fishing practices were consistent with WTO standards.
In September 2017, the WTO rejected allegations by the European Union that Boeing was receiving prohibited subsidies.
In June 2017, a WTO compliance panel rejected almost all claims by the European Union that alleged U.S. subsidies to Boeing were causing serious prejudice to Airbus, instead finding that 28 of 29 challenged programs were consistent with WTO rules.
BUILDINGCONFIDENCE AND RESPECT FOR AMERICA:
President Trump has used an America First foreign policy to restore respect for the United States throughout the world and to advance our interests.
After President Trump’s personal intervention, three student athletes from the University of California, Los Angeles, were released from China.
Three student athletes from the University of California, Los Angeles, were released from China after President Trumps personal intervention.
An American, a Canadian, and their three children were released from Taliban custody after United States Government and Pakistani forces secured their release.
The Trump Administration secured Otto Warmbiers release from North Korea.
Sandy Phan-Gill was released from Chinese detention after President Trump and his Administration intervened.
Aya Hijazi was released from an Egyptian prison and welcomed to the White House by President Trump.
Secretary of State Mike Pompeo and other representatives of the United States government traveled to Pyongyang, North Korea on May 9 to prepare for the Presidents upcoming meeting with North Korean leader Kim Jong Un. During Secretary Pompeos visit, the North Korean leadership released three American detainees.TheAmericans werewelcomedhome by President Trump and Melania.
President Trump followed through on his promise and recognized Jerusalem as the capital of the State of Israel, and directed the relocation of the U.S. Embassy. After announcing the United States' recognition of Jerusalem as the capital of Israel, President Trump quickly and efficiently opened the Embassy in Israel at a low cost to tax payers.
The State Department announced the new US Embassy in Israel would move to Jerusalem.
The Trump Administration withdrew from UNESCO to show it would not stand for the anti-Israel bias of the organization.
On May 14, 2018,the United States officially opened our Embassy in Jerusalem, Israel, 70 years to the day that President Truman recognized Israel as an independent country, making the United States the first nation to do so.
After meeting with North Koreas Vice Chairman Kim Yong Chol in the Oval Office, President Donald J. Trump said that the North Korean summit, planned for June 12 in Singapore was back on. He called Fridays meeting with Kim Yong Chol a great start, and confirmed the Vice Chairman gave him a letter from Chairman Kim Jong Un. Regarding the negotiations, the President said, Were going to deal. Yesterday, Secretary of State Mike Pompeo said President Trump has been very clear he wants the complete denuclearization of the North Korean peninsula, and expects both leaders to enter the summit in Singapore with their eyes wide open and with clear understanding of the possibilities of the future.
RESTORING AMERICAN INFLUENCE:
President Trump has made historic trips and delivered speeches abroad restoring Americas influence around the world.
President Trump went on a historic 12-day tour through Asia, including visits to five countries and attended three regional summits to promote America’s interests.
South Korea and Japan pledged to build closer defense collaboration with the United States, and the President underscored the commitment of the United States to providing advanced military equipment.
Cooperation was boosted between the Quad countries (the United States, Japan, India and Australia) on the sidelines of ASEAN in Manila.
President Trump reaffirmed the commitment of the United States to promote prosperity and security in the region by modernizing Americas development finance institutions and increasing their coordination with Japanese counterparts.
President Trump traveled to the Middle East and Europe to solidify relations with our allies in both regions and to push for greater commitments and cooperation.
President Trump visited Mecca, Jerusalem, and Rome, three of the worlds holiest places.
In Saudi Arabia, President Trump pushed for a coalition of nations to confront Iran and attended the opening of the Global Center for Combating Extremist Ideology.
President Trump persuaded allies to develop national plans to boost defense spending up to 2 percent of GDP by 2024, and for NATO to formally join the coalition to defeat ISIS at the 2017 NATO Leaders meeting.
President Trump visited Poland and a meeting of the G-20, where he pushed for closer cooperation and American First policies.
With G20 partners and the World Bank, the U.S. championed the establishment of the Women Entrepreneurs Finance Initiative (WeFi), which could leverage in excess of $1 billion in financing to support women entrepreneurs.
NORTH KOREA:
UN Security Council unanimously passed new sanctions on North Korea.
President Trump secured new commitments from Vietnam and China to increase pressure.
China affirmed it would fully implement UN Security Council resolutions to pressure North Korea.
KEEPING OUR PROMISE ON U.S.-CUBA POLICY:
The President kept his promise to roll back the Obama Administration's bad deal on Cuba that benefitted the Cuban regime at the expense of the Cuban people. 
August 2018 -The Trump Administration announced the creation of the Iran Action Group in a further demonstration of its commitment to pressure the Iranian Regime to change its hostile and destabilizing behavior.
August 2018 -President Trump signed the FY2019 National Defense Authorization Act, allocating a historic $716 billion dollars for defense spending including a 2.6 percent pay raise for our service men and women and an increase of 15,600 troops across the Army, Navy, Air Force, and Marine Corps.
