MAKING GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABLE:
President Trump is following through on his promise to drain the Washington swamp and make the Government accountable.
President Trump fulfilled his promise and nominated Neil Gorsuch to the United States Supreme Court.
President Trump has nominated over 75 Federal judges.
Twenty-eight judges have been confirmed, including a record-setting 14 circuit judges.
President Trump implemented higher ethical standards to make sure his Administration works for the American people.
The Presidentsigned an Executive Order that placed a five-year ban on lobbying and a lifetime ban on lobbying for foreign countries.
President Trump called for a comprehensive plan to reorganize the executive branch.
President Trump began a comprehensive overhaul of digitally-delivered government services.
President Trump called for a full audit of the Pentagon. The Department of Defense (DOD) responded to the Presidents call to action, and began its full financial statement audit.
Defense Secretary Jim Mattis called for business reform in the DOD to instill budget discipline and effective resource management.
To ensure the Government serves the needs of all Americans, President Trump has called for a comprehensive plan to reorganize the executive branch and has begun to implement this plan.
President Trump has commenced a comprehensive overhaul of digitally delivered Government services.
President Trump has called for “conducting a full audit of the Pentagon.” The Department of Defense (DOD) responded to the President’s call to action and has begun its first full financial statement audit.
Defense Secretary Jim Mattis has called for business reform in the DOD to instill budget discipline and effective resource management.
FUNDING THE PRESIDENTS PRIORITIES:
$1.6 billion for border wall spending. This is the first time the wall has been funded since 2003.
$703 million increase in ICE funding, from $6.4 billion to $7.1 billion, an increase of more than 10%.
$4 billion to fight the opioid epidemic.
$21 billion down payment on the Presidents promise to rebuild infrastructure.
