PROTECTING THE AMERICAN PEOPLE AND OURHOMELAND:
President Trump has enforcedimmigration laws to protectAmerican communities and American jobs.
Upon entering office, President Trump called on Congress to fully fund a wall along the Southern border, to close legal loopholes that enable illegal immigration, to end chain migration, and to eliminate the visa lottery program.
President Trump pulled the United States out of negotiations for a “Global Compact on Migration,” a plan for global governance of immigration and a refugee policy that may have compromised U.S. sovereignty.
Under President Trump’s leadership, the Department of Homeland Security took action to wind down the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (DACA) program in an orderly fashion, following the assessment of the Department of Justice (DOJ) that DACA lacks legal authorization.
This action gives Congress the opportunity to consider appropriate legislative solutions, as required by our Constitution.
The Trump Administration rescinded the unlawful Deferred Action for Parents of Americans (DAPA) program.
President Trump declared a national emergency allowing him to access specialized powers to enforce security on the border.
The Department of Homeland Security launched the office of Victims of Immigration Crime Engagement (VOICE).
From President Trump’s inauguration through FY 2019 to date, U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) made 269,419 arrests of illegal aliens.
In his first days in office, President Trump signed an executive order disqualifying sanctuary city from receiving federal grants.
President Trump signed three Executive Orders aimed at cracking down on international criminal organizations.
In June 2017, The Trump Administration announced the creation of the new National Public Safety Partnership, a cooperative initiative with cities to reduce violent crime.
The President released his immigration reform proposal which calls for the transition to a merit-based immigration plan.
Following pressure by the Trump Administration, Mexico has agreed to deploy 6,000 national guard troops throughout the country and on its Southern border to stop the immigration crisis, dismantle human-smuggling networks, and work more closely with the U.S. to share information about migrants.
ENFORCING U.S. BORDER SECURITY:
President Trump protects American communities and restores law and order at the border so Americans can feel safe in their communities.
The Trump Administration has secured funding for approximately 445 miles of the total 722 miles of border wall requested.
President Trump ordered the hiring of 10,000 new ICE agents and 5,000 additional border patrol agents.
The Department of Justice announced more than $98 million in grant funding to hire 802 additional full-time law enforcement officers.
President Trump signed an Executive Order to restore state and local law enforcements access to surplus Defense Department equipment through the 1033 program, including safety equipment.
President Trump signed a memorandum deploying National Guard troops to the Southwest border.
The Trump Administration has prioritized targeting gang members including members of MS-13.
In September 2017, the DOJ worked with Central American partners to arrest and charge about 4,000 MS-13 members.
The Department of Homeland Security arrested 796 MS-13 gang members and associates in FY 2017, an 83 percent increase from the previous year.
In FY2018, DHS arrested more than 10,000 gang members including more than 2,000 members of MS-13.
U.S. Border Patrol and the Office of Field Operations have seized a combined nearly 3 million pounds of drugs since 2017.
The Trump Administration has worked to partner with local law enforcement to enforce immigration laws.
As of May 2019, 80 counties in 21 states are participating in the 287(g) program, which gives state and local law enforcement entities delegated authority by ICE to enforce immigration in their jurisdiction.
The Trump Administration has made removals of illegal immigrants a priority.
In FY 2017, ICE conducted 226,119 removals. The proportion of removals resulting from ICE arrests increased from 65,332, or 27 percent of total removals in FY 2016 to 81,603, or 36 percent of total removals, in FY 2017.
In FY2018, ICE conducted 256,085 removals, an increase of 13% over FY2017, with 57% of the removals in FY2018 being convicted criminals.
