WORKING WITH LOCAL LAW ENFORCEMENT:
President Donald J. Trump and the Department of Justice are working with local law enforcement to protect American communities.
The Department of Justice announced more than $98 million in grant funding through the Office of Community Oriented Policing Services COPS Hiring Program to allow 802 additional full-time law enforcement officers.
President Trump signed Executive Order 13809 to restore State and local law enforcement’s access to surplus equipment from the Defense Department, such as armored vehicles.
In June 2017, Attorney General Jeff Sessions announced the creation of the new National Public Safety Partnership, a cooperative initiative with cities to reduce violent crimes.
Attorney General Sessions expanded Project Safe Neighborhoods to encourage U.S. Attorney’s to work with communities to develop customized crime reduction strategies.
Attorney General Sessions returned to longstanding Department of Justice charging policy for our Federal prosecutors, trusting them once again and directing them to return to charging the most serious, readily provable offense.
Prosecutors were directed by the Department of Justice to focus on taking illegal guns off our streets.
Criminals charged with unlawful possession of a firearm has increased 23 percent.
PROTECTING THE RIGHTS OF ALL AMERICANS:
President Trumps Administration is protecting the rights of all Americans.
Under President Trump, the Department of Justice has supported students whose free-speech rights have been under attack on university campuses.
The Department of Justices Civil Rights Division is reviewing a complaint by a coalition of more than 60 Asian-American associations that alleges racial discrimination against Asian-Americans in Harvard Universitys admissions policies and practices.
The Department of Justice secured a guilty plea for the first case prosecuted under the Hate Crimes Prevention Act involving a victim targeted because of gender identity.
CONFRONTINGORGANIZED CRIME:
President Trump and the Department of Justice have aggressively confronted organized crime from street gangs to criminal cartels.
President Trump signed three Executive Orders – 13773, 13774, and 13776 – aimed at cracking down on international criminal organizations, including drug cartels and gangs, and preventing violence against law enforcement officers.
Attorney General Sessions designated MS-13 as a priority for the Organized Crime Drug Enforcement Task Force, to allow Federal law enforcement to utilize an expanded toolkit in its efforts to dismantle the organization.
The United States, El Salvador, Guatemala, and Honduras joined together to charge more than 4,000MS-13 and 18th Street gang members in the United States and Central America, including the alleged leader of MS-13s East Coast Program.
August 2018 - More than 20 individuals associated with MS-13 were arrested in California on Federal and State charges in connection with their gang activities.
The Department of Justice convicted eight members of an international criminal organization, known as the Rendon-Reyes Trafficking Organization, on Federal charges arising from their scheme to force young women and girls from Mexico and Latin America into prostitution.
RESHAPING THE AMERICAN COURTS
The White House nominee for Supreme Court Justice- Neil Gorsuch-was confirmed on April 7.
Justice Gorsuch is the first Supreme Court Justice confirmed in the first 100 days since 1881.
To date, 21 new circuit judges were confirmed- the most in a first year in over a century.
ADDRESSING SCHOOL VIOLENCE:
Signed Rep. Rutherfords STOP School Violence Act and Sens. Cornyn-Murphy "Fix NICS Act."
$2 billion for school safety.
August 2018 - Senate RepublicansAndPresident Trump Had Seven Judicial ConfirmationsIn One Week
Senate Republicans and President Trump continue to smash records as far as judicial confirmations are concerned, with seven Senate confirmations in just the past week  five of them women.
August 2018 -This BringsTheCurrent Total To 24 Circuit Court Confirmations And 45 Federal Judges
The Senates confirmation pace has actually accelerated in 2018. According to the Senate Judiciary Committee, 24 circuit court judges have been confirmed so far  the most ever at this stage in a presidency. Including district court confirmations and the seven judges confirmed last week, the federal bench now has 45 federal judges nominated by the current president.
August 2018 -President Trump and Senate Republicans have already installed 24 Appellate court judges and will confirm two more federal appeals court judges by August 17th.
The 13 Circuit Court Judges Will Shape Decisions On Immigration, Voting Rights, Abortion, And The Environment For Generations.
There are 179 Authorized Judgeships For The U.S. Court Of Appeals And President Trump And Republicans Have The Power To Install More Than 20 Percent Of The Judges On The Nations Second-Highest Court.
September 2018 -The Ideological Balance Of The U.S. Sixth And Seventh Circuit Courts Of Appeals Shifted From Liberal To Conservative, Thanks To Judicial Nominees Selected By President Donald Trump.
September 2018 -President Trump Saw 24 Of His Nominees To The U.S. Court Of Appeals Confirmed During The First Congressional Term Of His Presidency.
