Rolling Back Job Killing Regulations:
President Trump is rolling back wasteful and costly regulations that have stood in the way of hardworking Americans.
President Trump signed an Executive Order, mandating that two regulations must be eliminated for every regulation created in order to reduce compliance costs.
The Administration actually eliminated 22 regulations for every new regulatoryaction.
The Administration issued 67 deregulatory actions while only imposing three new regulatory actions.
In FY 2017, theAdministration saved $8.1 billion in lifetime net regulatory cost savings, equivalent to $570 million per year.
Throughout 2017, President Trump has made good on his promise to cut red tape, and in doing so has reenergized the United States’ agricultural, energy, and infrastructure sectors by freeing them from oppressive and stifling regulations.
President Trump has signed 15 Congressional Review Act resolutions into law, more than any other president, ending burdensome Obama-era rules and regulations.
According to a study by NERA Economic Consulting, implementing the Obama Administrations plan under the Paris Climate Agreement could have cost the United States economy nearly $3 trillion and 6.5 million industrial sector jobs by 2040.
President Trump signed 15 Congressional Review Act resolutions into law that is estimated to save American taxpayers $3.7 billion.
According to a study by NERA Economic Consulting, if we implemented the Obama Administration’s plan under the Paris Climate Agreement, it could have cost the U.S. economy more than $3 trillion annually and 6.5 million industrial sector jobs by 2040.
President Trump signed an Executive Order that reduced the time it took to approve infrastructure projects from 10 years to two years.
President Trump has rolled back President Obama’s job killing power plan and ended the previous administration’s war on coal.
UNPRECEDENTED REGULATORY ROLLBACK:
To date, 860 regulatory actions have been withdrawn or removed from active status.
The WSJ said President Trump is "rolling back more regulations than any President in history."
RECORD-SETTING NUMBER OF CONGRESSIONAL REVIEW ACT (CRA) BILLS SIGNED:
President Trump has signed a record-breaking 15 CRA bills to roll back regulations.
Since the CRA became law in 1996, only onehad ever been signed (George W. Bush in 2001)
Along with Executive Orders, these bills will reduce regulatory costs by $18 billion annually.
