FIGHTING BACK AGAINST OPIOIDS:
President Trump and his Administration are fighting back against drug addiction and opioid abuse.
President Trump declared a Nationwide Public Health Emergency to address the opioid crisis.
The Presidents Council of Economic Advisers (CEA) found evidence that suggests that drug overdoses involving opioids were underreported by as much as 24 percent.
The Administration provided nearly $500 million to states to prevent and treat opioid abuse. Another $500 million was requested in the 2018 FYBudget.
In April, the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) laid out a comprehensive five-point strategy to combat the opioid abuse crisis.
The Department of Justice announced that fentanyl substances are a drug class under the Controlled Substances Act. This meant anyone who possesses, imports, distributes or manufactures illicit fentanyl-related substances would be subject to criminal prosecution similar to other controlled substances.
Anyone who possesses, imports, distributes, or manufactures any illicit fentanyl-related substance will be subject to criminal prosecution similar to other controlled substances.
The DOJ announced its first-ever indictments against two Chinese nationals and their North American-based associates for distributing large quantities of fentanyl and other opiate substances.
In an opioid fraud crackdown, the DOJ charged more than 400 people, including doctors and medical facilities, for prescribing unnecessary opioids, fueling the drug crisis.
In 2017, the Administration provided nearly $500 million to States to prevent and treat opioid abuse. The President’s FY 2018 Budget requests another $500 million.
On National Drug Take Back Day, the Drug Enforcement Administration collected a record-breaking 912,305 pounds – 456 tons – of potentially dangerous expired, unused, or unwanted prescription drugs at more than 5,300 collection sites.
This was a record-breaking day, with collections from more than 5,300 sites.
PROTECTING LIFE:
President Trump recognizes the precious gift of life and protects the sanctity of life at all stages.
In his first week in office, President Trump reinstated and expanded the Mexico City Policy that prevented $9 billion in foreign aid from being used to fund the abortion industry.
President Trump de-funded a U.N. agency for colluding with Chinas brutal program of forced abortion and sterilization.
President Trump worked with the Congress to sign a bill overturning an Obama midnight regulation that prohibited States from defunding abortion service providers.
The Trump Administration published guidance which promises to enforce the Obamacare requirement that taxpayer dollars should not support abortion coverage in exchange plans.
Reinstated the Mexico City Policy to ban any U.S. foreign aid to organizations that perform abortions.
Signed a Congressional Review Act bill to allow states to restrict Planned Parenthood Funding. 
