FULFILLINGOUR COMMITMENT TO OUR COUNTRYS VETERANS:
President Trump is making sure the government fulfills its commitment to our countrys Veterans.
President Trump signed the Veterans Accountability and Whistleblower Protection Act to allow senior officials in the Department of Veterans Affairs (V.A.) to fire failing employees and establish safeguards to protect whistleblowers.
Through 2018, more than 4,300 Veterans Affairs employees were removed, demoted, or suspended as a result of the Veterans Accountability and Whistleblower Protection Act
In August 2017, after passing Congress unanimously, President Trump signed the Veterans Appeals Improvement and Modernization Act.
This streamlined the lengthy process that veterans undergo when appealing disability benefits claims with the Veterans Affairs.
In August 2017, the President signed the Harry W. Colmery Veterans Educational Assistance Act, an important step in providing our nation’s heroes the support they have earned.
This funded the post-9/11 GI Bill, which provided educational benefits to veterans, service members, and their family members, including tuition, fees, books, housing, and additional costs.
The President signed the V.A. Choice and Quality Employment Act of 2017 to authorize $2.1 billion in additional funds for the Veterans Choice Program (VCP).
President Trump signed a bill to allow the V.A. to fire incompetent employees.
President Trump signed legislation to fully fund the popular V.A. Choice Program.
In August 2017, The President signed the V.A. Choice and Quality Employment Act of 2017 which authorized $2.1 billion in additional funds for the Veterans Choice Program (VCP).
In November 2017, the Trump Administration created a new White House V.A. Hotline, staffed by veterans and family members, who will provide our nation’s Veterans with a direct, dedicated contact line to answer their needs and concerns.
Since May 2019, the White House VA Hotline has surpassed 250,00 calls.
In April 2017, the VA launched its online “Access and Quality Tool” which provides veterans with data to help them make informed decisions about their health care.
In June 2018, President Trump signed The VA MISSION Act, which works to integrate the VA healthcare system and modernize it for the 21st century while providing Veterans with more choices in their healthcare options, whether from VA doctors or the community.
In 2018, the VA announced three initiatives to expand access to healthcare for veterans using telehealth technology:
Anywhere to Anywhere Veterans Affairs Health Care allows Veterans Affairs providers to use telehealth technology to serve veterans no matter where the provider or veteran is located.
V.A. Video Connect allows veterans and providers to connect by video across the country.
The Veteran Appointment Request (VAR) application allows veterans to schedule appointments at Veterans Affairs facilities on digital devices.
In April 2019, the VA Announced a major expansion of its telehealth offerings in order to provide veterans living in rural or remote areas with the best possible care.
The VA Telehealth initiative will involve partnerships with private sector companies including Walmart, T-Mobile, and Phillips.
