“There is no authoritative list of government agencies.” That’s a quote from the first edition of the Administrative Conference of the United States’ Sourcebook.
How can we possibly promise Americans that their government is operating efficiently  not wasting their hard-earned money  when we aren’t even sure the exact scope of the federal bureaucracy?
Every list of federal agencies has discrepancies from all the others. Independent executive agency lists range from 78 to 137, and Cabinet units range from 174 to 268. Other lists have over 440 agencies within the federal government. Congress and Executive officials have delegated responsibilities to each of these agencies without always taking into account the purview of other departments. This has created a wide area of shared regulatory space, which means not only are resources being wasted as more than one group is tasked with addressing an issue, but sometimes conflicting information or regulations are formulated.
Additionally, expertise is wasted when agencies don’t know the resources available to them through other, complementary agencies. Coordination should be baked into the ethos of these organizations, and cross-agency management should be focused on identifying areas where work can be streamlined and improved.
Finally, these agencies tend to fall into patterns over time, failing to bring in the most talented members of the younger generations or improving the technology they rely on. It’s important that these agencies are equipped to attract and retain the best talent available, and that they have the resources they need to upgrade their systems in a way that maximizes their utility to the American public, as well as their security.
In short, these agencies should be rewarded for streamlining operations within themselves while coordinating with other agencies to work in a consistent and well informed manner, while also optimizing operations, staff, and technology.
Join the fight
Problems to be Solved
The American people are paying for an oversized and inefficient federal workforce.
The federal workforce is aging fast and struggles to recruit and retain young workers.
Help make this idea a reality.
We need to ensure that our federal government is best set up to serve the people, and we have done a poor job of it. Federal agencies have grown and morphed over the years, until they’ve reached their current status. 
Goals
Increase efficiency so as to not lose productivity
Improve the recruitment and retention of younger workers
As President, I will…
Create a task force within the OMB to perform an audit of all federal agencies, clearly defining a list of them, their charge, and their list of responsibilities. Hire a management consulting firm to do the same, and have the two reconcile their report to put together a series of recommendations for streamlining the federal bureaucracy.
Promote cooperation in these agencies by providing incentives for management to work together with other agencies that have shared regulatory space.
Provide sufficient funding so that each agency can maintain up-to-date, secure technological infrastructure to carry out their work.
Enhance the recruitment and retention of younger workers by changing hiring guidelines, compensation, and reporting structures.
Explore More Policies
