$1
$10
$25
$5
$50
Add your name if you support a wealth tax:
Careers
Contact Us
Follow Tom on Twitter    Follow Tom on Facebook    Follow Tom on Instagram    Follow Tom on YouTube
Help Tom get his message out to more voters like you — even $1 helps.
Invest in this campaign
Join Tom in the fight for climate justice:
Join our campaign:
Messages from 46866 from Tom Steyer 2020 are recurring. Message & Data Rates May Apply. Text HELP for Info. Text STOP to opt out. Privacy Policy.
Other Amount
Paid for by Tom Steyer 2020
Play Video
Play Video      Play Video
Press
Press inquiries: press@tomsteyer.com
Privacy Policy
Share on Facebook            Share on Twitter            Share via Email
Download and print Toms HBCU 2030 plan. 
Join Tom in calling for these necessary changes to the fabric of our government:
Join Tom in supporting the legacy and future of HBCUs:
Join Tom in the fight for climate justice:
Join Tom in the fight to improve the quality of education:
Join us:
Join me in calling for these necessary changes to the fabric of our government.
Join our campaign:
Transparency
Learn more ›
Donate here
Read Toms International Climate Plan now.
Donate today!
Help Tom get his message out to more voters like you — even $1 helps. Make your donation today.
Read Toms full plan to reform the Criminal Justice System.
Thank you for signing up to volunteer!
Learn more about Toms education policy »
Read Toms full Immigration Plan.
Support our campaign
Facebook
Twitter
Email
Download and Print the full agenda.
Learn more ›
Learn more about Toms affordable housing plan.
Learn more about Toms plan to transform the Criminal Justice System.
Learn more ›
Learn more about Toms education policy »
Learn more about Toms Latino Agenda: Un Plan De, Por y Para el Pueblo Latino.
Learn more about Toms plan to improve the quality of care for the disabled community.
Learn more about Toms ties with the Latino community.
Learn more about the Working Families Tax Cut plan.
Learn more about Toms Latino Agenda: Un Plan De, Por y Para el Pueblo Latino.
Download and Print the full African American Policy.
Read Toms Asian American and Pacific Islander (AAPI) Policy.
