A plan for a people-powered economy
Unchecked corporations and their corrupt cronies are controlling our democracy — Tom will put people in the driver’s seat again.
Investing in people
Tom will protect the 5 Rights we all need to thrive — the right to an equal vote, clean air and clean water, a good education, affordable health care, and a living wage.
He will direct government spending to new business opportunities, good-paying jobs, and a skilled and healthy workforce.
His plan includes increased investments in public schools, higher education, worker training, social service programs, and America’s infrastructure.
Unlike Trump, who works to fatten the pockets of the Trump organization and his corporate cronies, Tom believes it’s time for the wealthiest Americans to pay up.
His call for a wealth tax  — 1% on those whose net worth is above $32 million — could generate $1 trillion — money we could use to help relieve the burden of student loan debt, repair our infrastructure, upgrade our voting system, and mitigate the climate crisis.            Read A Community-led Plan For Climate Justice
Harnessing innovation and competition
Tom will unleash American creativity and ingenuity by ensuring fairness in a market-based economy.
It is time for a government controlled by the people, not corporations, to set economic rules of the road.
To harness innovation and promote competition, Tom will start by enforcing existing — and considering new — antitrust regulations to create fair markets across all sectors and industries.
By declaring a climate emergency on day one of his presidency, Tom will begin implementing his Justice-Centered Climate Plan, which will create 46 million jobs over ten years, according to an analysis conducted by a University of California researcher.
He will negotiate trade agreements with vital economic partners to strengthen key U.S. economic sectors.
These agreements will be negotiated in a manner that includes the voices and reflects the input of all stakeholders, particularly environmental groups, indigenous populations, and labor unions making the U.S. more economically competitive.            People Over Profits Economic Agenda
Tom’s background
While Donald Trump claims his long history of failed and bankrupted businesses made him a “master of the deal,” Tom is a true self-made billionaire.
In 1986, he opened Farallon Capital Management and grew the firm by investing in businesses that expanded and hired more people.
Tom and his wife, Kat Taylor, were among the first to sign the “Giving Pledge” to dedicate their wealth to philanthropic purposes during their lifetimes.
The grassroots campaigns Tom has led over the past ten years have put more renewable energy on the grid while creating thousands of new jobs and generating funding for schools and health care.            Meet Tom Steyer
Read Toms full Economic Agenda.
Read Toms Climate Justice plan.
Read a community-led plan for climate justice.
