How Tom and the People turned the tide to stop the Puente Power Plant
In the coastal city of Oxnard, California, Tom Steyer and the people defeated one of the largest energy corporations in the United States. The victory changed the way large, gas-fired power plants are permitted in the state and sent a powerful message to communities across America: when people come together, they can win.
Together, Tom and the people turned the tide. State officials announced their decision to reject the gas facility and NRG withdrew its application. The Puente Power Project was dead. 
Today, all the power plants on Oxnard’s coast, two of them owned by NRG, are closed. But NRG is refusing to take responsibility for demolishing its plants and restoring the beach. There is still a lot to do, but Tom will continue working with communities to take on corporate polluters.
Tom Steyer releases video urging opposition to Oxnard power plant.
Another power plant in Oxnard? Energy Commission must say no: Tom Steyer and Gladys Limon.
Editorial: The beginning of the end of big, climate-changing power plants in California.
How Producing Clean Power Turned Out to Be a Messy Business.
Tom and the People
Founded Need to Impeach
Tom launched a grassroots movement that grew to over eight million people.
Founded Need to Impeach
Tom launched Need to Impeach in 2017, a grassroots movement of over eight million people to push Congress to hold Donald Trump accountable well before it was politically popular. Now a majority of House Democrats support impeachment.
Defeated Dirty Energy in Nevada
Tom sponsored a ballot initiative to raise the minimum amount of renewable power.
Defeated Dirty Energy in Nevada
In Nevada, voters advanced a ballot initiative sponsored by Tom to raise the minimum amount of renewable power on the grid to 50% by 2030.
Beat Big Oil
Tom shut down efforts to roll back climate laws.
Beat Big Oil
When big oil companies tried to kill California’s ambitious climate laws, Tom successfully led the “No on Prop. 23” coalition and defeated their effort by a staggering 23-point margin.
Held Big Tobacco Accountable
Tom forced big tobacco companies to pay their share of tobacco-related health care costs.
Held Big Tobacco Accountable
To reduce smoking, fund health care, and save lives, Tom went toe-to-toe with Big Tobacco, and won a cigarette tax increase ballot measure that was passed by 64.4% of the state.
Beat Dirty Energy in Michigan
Tom joined voters demanding more renewable power and energy efficiency programs.
Beat Dirty Energy in Michigan
After more than 350,000 Michigan voters demanded more renewable power and energy efficiency programs, Tom successfully negotiated with the state’s largest utilities to accelerate their clean energy usage to 30% by 2030.
Amplified the People's Voice
Tom joined an environmentally-burdened community and defeated the polluting Puente Power Plant.
Amplified the Peoples Voice
After one of the largest energy providers in the United States proposed a gas-fired power plant in a predominantly low-income and Latinx California community, Tom joined residents and activists and successfully defeated the Puente Power Plant.
I stand with communities who are fighting the fossil fuel companies in their backyards. Find out more about the activists who pushed back against the Puente power plant—and won. pic.twitter.com/XRwMl2ZKEd
Tom Steyer (@TomSteyer) September 23, 2019
Led Research for Sustainability
TomKat Ranch is a place that explores new sustainable agriculture methods.
Led Research for Sustainability
Tom and his wife Kat started a 1,800-acre grass-fed cattle ranch that works with scientists on new regenerative agriculture methods and provide that research to the public.
Beat Big Pharma
Tom and a coalition won a drug-pricing transparency bill in California.
Beat Big Pharma
Tom and a broad coalition of consumer, labor, health, and business groups took on the pharmaceutical industry and won a drug-pricing transparency bill in California, despite millions spent by industry lobbyists opposed to drug reforms.
Banking For The People
By 2018, more than 75% of Beneficial State Bank’s loan portfolio funded mission-based categories.
Banking For The People
Using their own money as capital, Tom and Kat launched Beneficial State Bank in 2007 to provide value-based banking services. By 2018, more than 75% of the bank’s loan portfolio funded mission-based categories, such as renewable energy, affordable housing, and women and minority-owned businesses.
Mobilized Voters
In 2018, NextGen America reached over seven million young people between 18 and 35 years old.
Mobilized Voters
Tom founded this political advocacy group in 2013 to combat climate change, promote social justice, and increase civic engagement through grassroots organizing. Since its start, NextGen America has registered over 1.5 million voters.
Won Funding For Schools
He helped close a corporate tax loophole to generate billions of dollars for public schools.
Won Funding For Schools
Tom proposed, financed, and won Prop. 39, a California ballot initiative that closed a corporate tax loophole and provided $1.7B to schools for energy upgrades.
