Tom Steyer and Latinos
Despite the fact that the vast majority of Latinos in American are U.S. citizens, the anti-immigrant hysteria whipped up by President Donald Trump has led to increased xenophobia and hate toward Latinos in America.
The Latino community is an integrated and interconnected part of this nation. Tom Steyer knows that Latino priorities are the priorities of all Americans as a whole, yet Latinos have been some of the most marginalized communities.
From the cruel neglect of Puerto Rico to the racist demonization of Mexicans, to the exploitation of the humanitarian crisis in Venezuela for political gain, the Trump administration has been outwardly hostile toward Latino communities.
Despite the fact that the vast majority of Latinos in American are U.S. citizens, the anti-immigrant hysteria whipped up by President Donald Trump has led to increased xenophobia and hate toward Latinos in America. Images of children in cages at border detention facilities and a dogged determination to build a southern border wall make it clear that Latinos are under attack by the Trump Administration. This will end immediately under a Steyer Administration.
As a wealthy, white man Tom recognizes the privileges afforded to him and people like him. But they should not be privileges, but rights accessible to all. Tom has a track record of fighting for the right to learn, the right to clean air and water, the right to health care, the right to earn a living wage, and the right to an equal vote for all and making the American Dream a reality for all including Latino Americans.
Activism
Tom and his wife, Kat Taylor have a long track record of fighting alongside the Latino community for immigrant rights, pushing back against environmental racism, and standing for justice issues that impact Hispanic and Latino communities throughout the country.
Tom has worked to build a strong community of immigrant rights activists. Since October 2017, Tom has contributed over $3.3 million towards immigrant rights around the country, partnered with 14 different groups on immigrant legal defense both in CA and across the country, including with the University of California to support a national legal services network so undocumented immigrants could access free legal aid.
His work has helped 1,600 immigrants and refugees get a lawyer, more than 1,100 DACA applicants process renewal applications, and help recruit 7,100 volunteer lawyers, interpreters, mental health professionals, and organizers to fight for immigrants’ rights.
Tom was named a co-chairperson of the Latino Victory Fund in 2016. Tom’s organization, NextGen and LVF joined to recruit and train naturalized immigrants, DREAMers, and newly arrived Puerto Ricans to run for office.
NextGen, The Latino Community Foundation and Latin Life launched a voter registration effort focused on Latino voters. The Latino Community Foundation (LCF) joined forces with NextGen California and Latin Life to launch a major effort to register Latinos for the 2016 election as part of the Yo Voy a Votar ¿Y Tú? campaign with a goal of reaching up to 1 million eligible voters who had not yet registered.
On the Economy
Economic power rests with the American people, not big corporations. Endemic poverty is a daily experience for far too many Americans, many of whom are Latinos. We must address generational poverty head on and fight for a basic standard of living for all who call America home and equip those who are most vulnerable with the resources to live a safe, healthy life.
A Steyer administration will build an economy that creates wealth and prosperity for the working families of this country, and finally put people over profits.  In 2007, Kat and Tom founded Beneficial State Bank, a community bank in Oakland, CA, loaning money affordably to working people and projects that improve the quality of lives within local communities. They invested in the community, in businesses owned by women and Latinos, and affordable housing.
On Education
Tom believes that every American, regardless of race, ethnicity, or income bracket, has the right to quality education. Tom’s administration will work to reinvigorate our public schools by increasing resources to close the education achievement gap, improve school facilities, increase teacher pay and professional development, and ensure equal access to learning opportunities and resources.
Tom’ s education plan will provide free, universal access to quality pre-K programs to narrow the racial and income achievement gap, fully fund Title 1 to dramatically increase access to educational resources, rigorous curriculum and well-trained teachers for under-served students, and invest in STEM/STEAM education to prepare low-income students to join the innovation economy. He also will Increase access and affordability to higher education, technical and workforce training and continuing education, and provide two years of free community college and vocational training.
On Climate Justice
Tom believes everyone has the right to breathe fresh air and drink clean water, free from industrial poisons.
Taking action on climate change is Tom’s number one priority, and he understands that climate change is disproportionately affecting Latino communities, especially in low-income neighborhoods.
Under Tom’s Justice-Centered Climate Plan, every community will identify what they need most and his administration will issue $250 billion in new bonds to invest those community-determined projects. This investment will mobilize hundreds of billions more in order to support projects and jobs such as sustainable housing and building upgrades, clean energy generation and storage, urban greening, and clean transportation systems in the places they are needed most.
On Immigration 
Tom is willing to call Trump’s immigration policies out for what they are  racist. Tom believes the creativity, hard work, leadership, and valuable contributions of the 10.5  12 million undocumented immigrants living in America are going shamefully unrecognized, and his administration will work closely with Congress to establish a fair and inclusive path to citizenship for everyone.
Tom will use executive power to reinstate and extend DACA, enact DAPA, end the Muslim travel ban, and redesignate nations as TPS. Tom will end the cruel family separation policy, improve the visa system, and legally protect climate refugees. He supports the DREAM Act and believes access to U.S. citizenship is a right for all DREAMers.
On Health Care
Tom understands that different communities face different health care needs. For too long, Latinos, tribal nations, women, veterans, rural communities, people with disabilities, and other communities have been denied a full suite of health care services. In 2017, 25 percent of Latinos between the ages of 19 and 64 were uninsured, compared to eight percent of whites in the same age range.
The right to health isn’t just about building a system of quality, affordable healthcare. It also means that people have the right to choose and that nobody should fear losing everything they have due to unforeseen health care costs. And especially for the Latino community, it means access to information and programs that ensure patients can communicate with their health care providers and understand what is best for them and their families. With millions of Americans living without insurance, we need to make universal access to coverage a reality. Tom supports a public option, and he will protect and build on the Affordable Care Act (ACA), reaffirming the ACA’s commitment to providing for people younger than 26 and those living with pre-existing conditions.
