We Need A Wealth Tax
No deductions, no exemptions, no loopholes.
Its time the wealthy pay up.
Play Video      Play Video
Facebook
Twitter
Email
It is time for our nation to address the extreme and growing wealth gap in our society. Rising inequality allows family dynasties and rich corporations to buy our government and sell out working families. Together, we must rebuild the middle class.
A Steyer Administration will be a beacon of economic justice. It will fight corporate power and champion workers’ rights, health care and action on climate change. Those who reap the rewards of our current system are obligated to ensure equal opportunity for all in our society. To do so we must address inequality.
A Steyer Administration will implement a wealth tax on the top 0.1% of American families. This money can be used to invest in people and lift up the middle class. In its first ten years, it will raise $1.7 trillion dollars.
A wealth tax is like a property tax on all assets that wealthy people own, from cash to stocks to jewelry to jets. It is different from an income tax or consumption (sales) tax.
Add your name if you support a wealth tax:
Add your name if you support a wealth tax:
Share on Facebook            Share on Twitter            Share via Email
Tom has closed tax loopholes before, and hell do it again as president.
What 1 trillion dollars can get you
Over the next decade, the Institute On Taxation And Economic Policy projects all those pennies could raise over $1 trillion.
That’s enough for our nation to:
Repair our roads, bridges, and highways
Upgrade our voting machines to create more secure elections 
Mitigate climate change by investing in clean energy
A Wealth Tax by a Steyer Administration would be on a progressive scale to make sure the most wealthy Americans pay their fair share:
Total Net Worth Percentage Wealth Tax
$0  $31,999,999 0%
$32,000,000  $499,999,999  1.0%
$500,000,000  $999,999,999  1.5%
$1,000,000,000 + 2.0%
During the last 40 years, our nation experienced the massive redistribution of wealth from the middle and working class to the wealthy. Republicans continue to relentlessly disenfranchise and hurt working Americans. A Steyer Administration will rebalance the scales of justice and solve the widespread issue of income inequality.
“One of the primary roots of wealth inequality: [the idea that] the richest Americans get to live by a different set of rules than everyone else.”                          ─ Tom Steyer, Op-Ed in USA Today
Facebook
Twitter
Email
Follow Tom on Twitter    Follow Tom on Facebook    Follow Tom on Instagram    Follow Tom on YouTube
Paid for by Tom Steyer 2020
Transparency
Press
Careers
Contact Us
Privacy Policy
Press inquiries: press@tomsteyer.com
