John Delaney's plan for  						 												Fixing our Broken Politics
Home  John's Vision for America  Fixing our Broken Politics
Our politics and system of government have been broken by hyper-partisanship. Politicians who have the wrong incentives, limitless corporate money influencing our elections, and a discourse that focuses on anything but the facts about our pressing issues combine to make real solutions to our problems almost impossible to achieve.
End gerrymandering
Gerrymandering is a major cause of our divisive political atmosphere. When politicians can draw their own safe districts, they lose all incentive to look for common ground and can win reelection by being partisan fighters instead of consensus builders who work across party lines to get things done. Our system works best when people pick their representatives instead of politicians choosing their voters.
In Congress, John Delaney introduced the Open Our Democracy Act, which would:
Prohibit gerrymandering and require states to establish independent commissions to draw Congressional district boundaries
Make Election Day a federal holiday so workers have time to vote.
Protect voting rights and ensure people have the ability to vote.
John supports the Voting Rights Advancement Act, which would require that states with a history of violating voting rights get approval from the Department of Justice before making any changes to election procedures or voting requirements. He also supports automatic voter registration and same day registration.
Overturn Citizens United
Unlimited corporate money has made our democracy pay-to-play. John supports a constitutional amendment to overturn Citizens United.
Debate the Congress.
John pledges to debate Congressional leaders four times a year. Engaging with opposing points of view and focusing on the facts in a real debate is the best way to have an honest discussion about the problems our nation faces.
Support bipartisan legislation
When people work across the aisle towards common goals, Americans lives are improved. During the first 100 days of his presidency, John would advance only bipartisan bills.
Examples of landmark bipartisan legislation:
Americans with Disabilities Act
Food Stamp Act
Creation of Medicaid
Civil Rights Act
Clean Air Act
John is also proposing a national service program to provide opportunities for recent high school graduates to contribute to the betterment of the country and to meet and work with people from all backgrounds.
Related Issues:
National Service
Back to Issues Page
Back to issues page
Next Issue BetterCare
Read more
Share
Tweet
Email
