John Delaney's plan for  						 												Immigration
Home  John's Vision for America  Immigration
The United States is a nation of immigrants and almost all of us have a story of our families coming to the U.S. for a better life. We need to remember our history and be a welcoming country for those who want a better life for their families and who are seeking to be productive members of society.
The country is in need of immigration reform to update the system to account for changing times. We should seek to have an immigration system that is moral and fair.
Delaney believes accepting immigrants into the country greatly benefits Americans: helps reduce the deficit, boosts GDP, improves the solvency of social security, and enriches society; independent analysts have shown that immigration serves as a stimulus to the U.S. economy; immigrants are twice as likely to start a business as someone born here and immigrant-run businesses employ about one in ten American workers; and the more immigrants who are documented and pay taxes, the more money comes into our treasury to support programs like Social Security and Medicare.
Delaney would negotiate a comprehensive immigration reform deal. Immigration reform needs to be accomplished with bipartisan support, such as the bipartisan deal that passed the Senate in 2013.
Comprehensive immigration reform should:
Create a clear path to citizenship for undocumented immigrants and DREAMers.
Invest in effective border security, including high tech solutions, fencing, increased security personnel, and improvements to ports of entry to improve national security.
Reform the visa program for guest workers.
Increase refugee cap for resettlement in the U.S.
Related Posts
Delaney Statement on Trump’s Mexico Tariff Threat  May 31, 2019
Delaney Statement on DHS Secretary Resignation  April 7, 2019
Delaney: Closing Our Border Is a Political Stunt  April 3, 2019
Delaney: Trump-style Nationalism Is The Wrong Answer  April 1, 2019
Delaney: Mistreating Unaccompanied Immigrant Children Undermines Our Moral Authority﻿  February 22, 2019
During Shutdown Delaney Visits Immigrant Detention Center in Texas   January 9, 2019
Trump Irresponsibly Calls for Government Shutdown Over Border Wall Funding  December 11, 2018
Three Things You Can Do to Help #KeepFamiliesTogether  June 20, 2018
Back to Issues Page
Back to issues page
Next Issue Economic Opportunity
Read more
Share
Tweet
Email
