As the father of four daughters, Delaney has a strong personal commitment to women’s equality. As president, Delaney will protect women’s fundamental rights, fight for women’s equality in our society, and work to support women in the developing world. It is time to embrace the simple fact that women’s rights are human rights, and Delaney will use this approach to address the pressing issues facing women today.
Workplace
Delaney supports the Paycheck Fairness Act, which would ensure equal pay for equal work by protecting workers, allowing federal enforcement, and removing loopholes employers use to justify discrimination. It is unacceptable that women receive less pay for doing the same work, and pay disparities are even greater for African American, Hispanic, and Native American women. There is simply no excuse for allowing wage discrimination to continue.
Everyone deserves a safe workplace, and that includes the right to a workplace free of sexual harassment and gender discrimination. Delaney supports strong whistleblower protections and will ensure that the EEOC gets the funding it needs to enforce anti-discrimination laws.
Delaney will create a new paid family leave program so working women will be able to have 8 weeks of paid time off each year to care for newborns or newly adopted children, sick family members, or tend to their own serious health problems.
Health care
Delaney is pro-choice and supports Roe v. Wade as the law of the land. He is a strong supporter of access to reproductive care and a woman’s right to choose.
Delaney supports repealing the Hyde Amendment, which prohibits federal funding for abortion in most cases.
Delaney pledges to protect federal funding for Planned Parenthood.
In Congress, Delaney was proud to receive 100% on NARAL’s Congressional Scorecard.
Delaney has proposed a universal health care system that provides high-quality care to all, regardless of employment. This new plan will guarantee coverage for pregnancy, maternal care, and pre-existing conditions.
Civil rights
Delaney supports ratification of the Equal Rights Amendment, and in Congress was an original cosponsor of resolutions to remove the ratification deadline.
Delaney was an original cosponsor of the Violence Against Women Reauthorization Act, which would expand on the original law to include sexual harassment as an offense and close the Boyfriend Loophole by prohibiting dating partners convicted of domestic violence from owning or purchasing guns.
Delaney supports robust protections for victims of campus sexual assault, and will reverse the Trump administration’s policies that are harming survivors and weakening Title IX.
Global Womens Rights
Delaney understands the importance of US leadership in promoting women’s rights abroad, and will strengthen our commitments to international maternal and child health and the Global Partnership for Education, which has helped more than 40 million girls around the world enroll in school over the past 15 years.
Delaney would repeal the Global Gag Rule so women around the world who utilize medical facilities that receive U.S. aid have access to all necessary reproductive services
Click here to download a pdf of this plan.
