Kamala believes you should judge a society by the way it treats its children. And we know there’s a lot at stake for them in this election. Every decision we make has a profound impact on our nation’s youngest, most vulnerable residents. Whether it’s improving our education system, ensuring access to health care and mental health treatment, protecting the environment, overhauling our criminal justice system, reforming our immigration policies, or supporting working families, it all affects our children.
From the beginning of her career until now, one of Kamala’s highest priorities has been to fight for children. She believes that each and every child deserves a fair shot at success in life and that we have a responsibility to treat the children of the community as the children of the community. As President, she will put children at the center of her decision-making and treat their needs with the same urgency and importance as we treat any other national priority.
Here are the key points of Kamalas plan:
Economic:
Guarantee up to six months of paid family and medical leave for workers nationwide.
Cut child poverty by over 50% in her first term.
Physical Health and Mental Health:
All children – whether they live in rural or urban areas – will have access to a nurse and social worker at their school.
Invest in mental health and trauma-informed care, and provide toxic stress screenings for every child in the country.
Criminal Justice Reform:
Stop the treatment of children as adults in the criminal justice system.
Keep families together. Unlike what Trump has done in immigration to lock up babies in cages and separate families, Kamala believes that we must strive to do the opposite and keep families together where possible.
Accountability: 
Create a Bureau of Children and Family Justice to ensure Kamala’s Children’s Agenda gets done.
Read the full policy
Pitch in to elect Kamala!
$5
$25
$50
$100
$250
Other Amount
*If you've saved your information with ActBlue Express, your donation will go through immediately.
Meet Kamala
Our Agenda
Policies
Events
Store
Twitter Link
Instagram Link
Facebook Link
YouTube Link
Medium Link
Spotify Link Link
#ForThePeople
Privacy Policy
Terms of Service
Contact
Paid for by Kamala Harris For the People
2019    Copyright. All rights reserved.
PO Box 86 Baltimore, MD 21203
Get Involved
Donate
