Kamala has always stood up “for the people.” She knows that our diversity is our greatest strength, and that until all of us are equal, none of us are equal.
Justice is on the ballot; any time we deny justice to someone because of their race, their religion, or the language they speak, we deny justice to all the people. That’s why, as president, Kamala will fight to lift up historically disadvantaged and marginalized communities. This means making bold investments in communities of color and clearing the way onto critical on-ramps to economic opportunity like capital to start a business.
It means fighting to protect every American’s fundamental right to vote.
It means reforming our criminal justice system, which is deeply flawed and infected with bias.
It means reopening our doors to refugees and asylum-seekers of every race and religion, taking executive action to create a path to citizenship for DREAMers, and fighting to enact 21st century immigration reform that lives up to our values.
It means combating racial disparities in our health care system and delivering culturally competent care and resources patients need.
We need a president who will do everything in her power to level the playing field, stand up for equal rights and opportunities for all, and remind Americans that we have so much more in common than what separates us. Kamala will be that president.
Related Policies
Kamalas agenda on voting rights
Learn more about Kamala's agenda on voting rights.
Kamala’s plan for criminal justice reform
Learn more about Kamala’s olan to transform the criminal justice system.
Kamalas Climate Plan for the People
Learn more about Kamala's climate plan for the people.
A new roadmap to citizenship for dreamers
Learn more about Kamala’s plan to forge a roadmap to citizenship by executive action.
Pitch in to elect Kamala!
$5
$25
$50
$100
$250
Other Amount
*If you've saved your information with ActBlue Express, your donation will go through immediately.
Meet Kamala
Our Agenda
Policies
Events
Store
Twitter Link
Instagram Link
Facebook Link
YouTube Link
Medium Link
Spotify Link Link
#ForThePeople
Privacy Policy
Terms of Service
Contact
Paid for by Kamala Harris For the People
2019    Copyright. All rights reserved.
PO Box 86 Baltimore, MD 21203
Get Involved
Donate
