Our criminal justice system is deeply flawed, infected with bias, and in urgent need of reform. This isn’t something Kamala had to be taught, it’s something she’s always understood. Growing up with a stroller-eye view of the civil rights movement, her mother instilled in her the belief that justice was something you had to fight for.
That’s why Kamala became a prosecutor: to be a voice for people who needed an advocate and to make changes to the system from within. As District Attorney, Kamala championed one of the first re-entry programs in the nation to direct young people arrested for drug crimes into job training and counseling programs instead of jail. As Attorney General, Kamala’s Department of Justice became the first statewide agency to mandate a body camera program and launched the first of its kind implicit bias and procedural justice training in the country. She launched pattern and practice investigations into discriminatory actions by law enforcement agencies and pioneered data transparency initiatives on law enforcement activities. As Senator, Kamala has championed sentencing reform and introduced bipartisan legislation to end our country’s cash bail system.
As president, Kamala will continue to fight for end-to-end criminal justice reform. To ensure accountable and constitutional policing, she will double the civil rights division, renew and expand pattern and practice investigations, enforce consent decrees, and support legislation to end racial profiling.
To help end the era of mass incarceration, Kamala will take action to legalize marijuana, further reform federal sentencing laws, end private prisons and the profiting off of people in prison, and push states to prioritize treatment and rehabilitation for drug offenses. She will also seek a federal moratorium on the death penalty.
To help ensure those returning from prison and jail can successfully re-enter their communities, Kamala will start by fighting to expunge records for marijuana offenses, increase investments in reentry support and job training programs, and take executive action to “ban the box” so employers consider a job candidate’s qualifications first—without the stigma of a former conviction.
Kamalas plan for criminal justice reform
Learn more about Kamala's plan to transform the criminal justice system.
Pitch in to elect Kamala!
$5
$25
$50
$100
$250
Other Amount
*If you've saved your information with ActBlue Express, your donation will go through immediately.
Meet Kamala
Our Agenda
Policies
Events
Store
Twitter Link
Instagram Link
Facebook Link
YouTube Link
Medium Link
Spotify Link Link
#ForThePeople
Privacy Policy
Terms of Service
Contact
Paid for by Kamala Harris For the People
2019    Copyright. All rights reserved.
PO Box 86 Baltimore, MD 21203
Get Involved
Donate
