In America today, the cost of living is going up, paychecks aren’t keeping up, and the rules keep being written to benefit big corporations and the top 1%. When the bankers who crashed our economy get bonuses but the workers who brought our country back are barely getting by, it’s clear: Our economy isn’t working for working people.
Kamala believes we need to fight for working families — to increase paychecks, decrease the cost of living and combat sexism, racism, and corporate favoritism in our economy to ensure every American gets a fair shot.
That’s why Kamala’s first priority as president will be to give working and middle class families an overdue income boost. Under her plan, she’ll reverse President Trump’s trillion-dollar tax cut for big corporations and the top 1% and use that money to give a tax credit of up to $6,000 to working families each year.
That’s just the start. To raise wages, Kamala will fight to empower unions, make a $15 minimum wage the national floor, and create stricter penalties for companies that cheat their workers.
While Kamala fights for fair wages, she’ll work to constrain the rising costs that keep Americans up at night. She’ll pass her Rent Relief Act to provide a tax credit for people spending 30 percent or more of their income on rent and utilities. She’ll increase the federal government’s investment in child care to ensure working families don’t pay more than 7 percent of their income on care. And she’ll crack down on pharmaceutical companies that price-gouge while empowering the government to negotiate down the price of prescription drugs.
But let’s speak truth: We didn’t get here by accident. Americans are struggling to get by because leaders in Washington are not working in the interests of working people. Racial and gender inequality are rampant, and corporations have increased their power to exploit workers. Kamala knows we need to fight back. As president, she’ll mandate equal pay for women, promote policies that build wealth in communities of color, and crack down on corporations that exploit vulnerable Americans for profit.
Kamala has been waging this fight her entire career. As Attorney General, she actively prosecuted financial crimes, including predatory lending. She fought Wall Street’s biggest banks and won $20 billion for California homeowners harmed by the foreclosure crisis. And she took on the country’s largest for-profit college scam, winning more than $1 billion in relief for students and veterans defrauded by Corinthian Colleges.
Related Policies
Kamalas plan for equal pay
Read Kamala's plan to hold corporations accountable for pay inequality in America.
Kamalas Rent Relief and LIFT Acts
Kamala's plan to give working families relief from high costs and housing insecurity.
Closing the opportunity gap
Read Kamala's plan to make bold investments in HBCUs and Black Entrepreneurship.
Fighting for Organized Labor
Learn more about Kamala's commitment to fight for organized Labor.
Kamalas Medicare for All plan
Learn more about Kamala's Medicare for All plan.
Kamalas plan to set fair prescription drug prices
Learn more about Kamala's plan to set fair prescription drug prices.
Opportunity for people with disabilities
Read Kamala's plan for full inclusion and civil rights for people with disabilities.
Pitch in to elect Kamala!
*If you've saved your information with ActBlue Express, your donation will go through immediately.
$5
$25
$50
$100
$250
Other Amount
Meet Kamala
Our Agenda
Policies
EventsOpens in a new window
StoreOpens in a new window
Twitter
Instagram
Facebook
YouTube
Medium
Spotify Link
#ForThePeople
Privacy Policy
Terms of Service
Contact
Paid for by Kamala Harris For the People
2019    Copyright. All rights reserved.
PO Box 86 Baltimore, MD 21203
Get Involved
DonateOpens in a new window
