In America today, women who work full time are paid just 80 cents, on average, for every dollar paid to men. For Latinas it’s 53 cents, for Native American women it’s 58 cents, and for Black women it’s 61 cents. All that money adds up to more than $400,000 over the course of a woman’s career, and more than $1 million for Latinas, Native American women, and Black women.
It’s not right that young women need to work more hours to pay off their student debt. It’s not right that new mothers are penalized for taking time off to care for their children. It’s not right that women retirees have less security and accumulated wealth after working their entire careers. It’s not right that the wage gap has barely budged this entire century.
It’s not right, and it needs to change.
For too long, we’ve put the burden entirely on workers to hold corporations accountable for pay discrimination through costly lawsuits that are increasingly difficult to prove. We’ve let corporations hide their wage gaps, but forced women to stand up in court just to get the pay they’ve earned. It’s time to flip the script and finally hold corporations accountable for pay inequality in America.
Kamala has a simple message for corporations: Pay women fairly or pay the price.
That’s a message she intends to put into action as president. For the first time in American history, she’ll require corporations to show they’re not engaging in pay discrimination, and fine companies that fail to close their pay gaps.
Here are the key points of Kamalas plan:
Companies with 100 employees or more will be required to obtain a certification from the Equal Employment and Opportunity Commission (EEOC) or else face fines on their profits.  Fines will be invested in paid family leave programs. 
Require federal contractors to receive Equal Pay Certification within two years of Harris taking office. If they don’t, they’ll be barred from competing for federal contracts valued at more than $500,000.
Read the full policy
Pitch in to elect Kamala!
*If you've saved your information with ActBlue Express, your donation will go through immediately.
$5
$25
$50
$100
$250
Other Amount
Meet Kamala
Our Agenda
Policies
EventsOpens in a new window
StoreOpens in a new window
Twitter
Instagram
Facebook
YouTube
Medium
Spotify Link
#ForThePeople
Privacy Policy
Terms of Service
Contact
Paid for by Kamala Harris For the People
2019    Copyright. All rights reserved.
PO Box 86 Baltimore, MD 21203
Get Involved
DonateOpens in a new window
