Kamala has been a leader in the fight for racial justice throughout her career. Working to repair the systemic inequalities people of color face in this country will remain a top priority for her as president.
Kamala believes you can’t have racial justice until you have economic justice. Today in America, Black families own $5 of wealth for every $100 of their white counterparts, nearly a third of Native American children live in poverty, and Latinas are paid 53 cents for every dollar paid to white men. Kamala’s LIFT Act  the largest tax cut for working Americans in a generation  would begin to tackle these inequities and provide relief to 1 in 2 Americans, including 60% of Black families. We also must recognize that years of intentional segregation and discriminatory lending practices have long impacted housing policy, and as a result, Black and Hispanic households are twice as likely to rent today as white households. Kamala’s Rent Relief Act will provide these families relief in the face of skyrocketing rental prices.
Truly addressing racial inequality also requires that we finally provide every child access to opportunity. Yet, 65 years after Brown v. Board, opportunity is still denied and educational segregation is getting worse. Kamala was a part of only the second class to integrate at Berkeley public schools after Brown, and she knows there is so much more work to do. That’s why her teacher pay plan is designed to build a pipeline of teachers of color and inject billions of federal dollars into schools serving students of color. If a Black child has a Black teacher by 3rd grade, it makes them 13% more likely to go to college.
Should our children decide to pursue college, Kamala believes that Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) and other Minority Serving Institutions (MSIs) should be available to them if they choose. As a graduate of Howard University, Kamala knows firsthand the role HBCUs and MSIs play in shaping identity and building community. In the Senate, Kamala fought to pass her HBCU Historic Preservation Reauthorization Bill to rebuild HBCU campus infrastructure, and co-sponsored legislation to permanently increase funding for MSIs. As president she’ll continue her lifelong commitment to these landmark institutions by making attendance debt-free for students and making a multi-billion investment in programs that teach the next generation of leaders of color.
Kamala also knows that tackling racial injustices means taking on systemic and institutionalized inequalities and biases that still exist in America  including in our health care system, our criminal justice system, and our democracy.
For example, in our health care system, Black women are three to four times more likely to die from pregnancy-related causes than white women. That’s why Kamala has been a leading voice in the fight to reduce maternal mortality, first introducing her Maternal CARE Act in 2018. In our criminal justice system, which remains deeply infected with bias, Kamala knows we have more work to do. As DA and AG, Kamala created a diverse office, hiring lawyers of color, women and LGBTQ+ prosecutors to ensure her office reflected the community it served. As president, she will continue her lifelong work for end-to-end criminal justice reform. In our democracy, millions of Americans are still denied the right to vote by a wave of state laws intentionally designed to disenfranchise Black Americans, Latinx Americans, Native Americans, and college students. Kamala will take on voter suppression and make it easier for people of color to vote.
Finally, as Kamala has said, President Trump is not trying to make America great, he’s trying to make America hate. As president, she will speak out about the rise of white supremacist violence that has targeted Black churches, synagogues and immigrant communities. She believes we need a president who will lift Americans up and bring them together, rather than beat them down.
Reforming our criminal justice system                                Protecting voting rights and our elections                                Combatting the Racial Homeownership Gap                                Investing in HBCUs and Black Entrepreneurship
Back To Issues
