Our country has been at war for the past 18 years; we have deployed more than 3 million service members since the attacks of September 11, 2001. Our military families are as tough as their loved ones and have also carried a tremendous burden. We must serve them — service members, veterans, their families, and their caregivers — as well as they have served us.
The Trump administration is failing them all by allowing the rate of veterans suicide to remain shockingly high, tapping military personnel funds for his unpopular and controversial border wall, targeting military service members with predatory immigration policies, and allowing the American opioid crisis to disproportionately claim veteran victims. To make matters worse, they have been systematically neglecting DoD and V.A. programs, letting quality and wait times get worse, and outsourcing care to a few large corporations.
Kamala believes that our veterans deserve so much more. That’s why as Attorney General, she went after companies who preyed on our veterans, such as Corinthian Colleges, which used fraudulent marketing tactics to take advantage of veterans looking to further their education. In the Senate, she has introduced legislation to ensure military housing is held to high health and safety standards and championed efforts to make sure that veterans can take full advantage of GI Bill benefits to make sure that foster children and legal wards are also eligible for unused benefits their parent may have.
It’s time to honor the service and sacrifice of our warfighters, veterans, and their families. As commander-in-chief, Kamala will work to provide them the support they have earned.
Here are the key points of Kamalas plan:
Expand access to health care and housing assistance available to veterans with “other-than-honorable” discharges.
Further reform the V.A., including ensuring that it completes the integration of its commercial health records systems with the Pentagon. 
Create a Veteran’s Transitional Housing Block Grant to help communities design innovative solutions to our veteran’s homelessness crisis. 
Provide strong support for military families before, during, and after deployment.
Ensure equal treatment for all members of the military.
Read the full policy
Pitch in to elect Kamala!
$5
$25
$50
$100
$250
Other Amount
*If you've saved your information with ActBlue Express, your donation will go through immediately.
Meet Kamala
Our Agenda
Policies
Events
Store
Twitter Link
Instagram Link
Facebook Link
YouTube Link
Medium Link
Spotify Link Link
#ForThePeople
Privacy Policy
Terms of Service
Contact
Paid for by Kamala Harris For the People
2019    Copyright. All rights reserved.
PO Box 86 Baltimore, MD 21203
Get Involved
Donate
