Joe Biden is running for President to rebuild the middle class and ensure that this time everyone comes along. He believes the middle class isn’t a number, but a value set which includes the ability to own your own home and live in a safe community. Housing should be a right, not a privilege.
Today, however, far too many Americans lack access to affordable and quality housing. Nationwide, we have a shortage of available, affordable housing units for low-income individuals. Tens of millions of Americans spend more than 30% of their income on housing – leaving them with nowhere near enough money left over to meet other needs, from groceries to prescription drugs. And, tens of millions of Americans live in homes that endanger their health and safety.
Communities of color are disproportionately impacted by the failures in our housing markets, with homeownership rates for Black and Latino individuals falling far below the rate for white individuals. Because home ownership is how many families save and build wealth, these racial disparities in home ownership contribute to the racial wealth gap. It is far past time to put an end to systemic housing discrimination and other contributors to this disparity. 
As President, Joe Biden will invest $640 billion over 10 years so every American has access to housing that is affordable, stable, safe and healthy, accessible, energy efficient and resilient, and located near good schools and with a reasonable commute to their jobs. Biden will do this by:
Ending redlining and other discriminatory and unfair practices in the housing market.
Providing financial assistance to help hard-working Americans buy or rent safe, quality housing, including down payment assistance through a refundable and advanceable tax credit and fully funding federal rental assistance.
Increasing the supply, lowering the cost, and improving the quality of housing, including through investments in resilience, energy efficiency, and accessibility of homes.
Pursuing a comprehensive approach to ending homelessness.
Housing is an essential part of Biden’s broader strategy to grow strong, healthy communities in every zip code – from his plan to rebuild our nation’s infrastructure and revitalize local economies to his plan to invest in our public schools.
The Biden Principles for Housing
While the housing challenges Americans face in different rural and urban communities across the country may vary, every American in every zip code should have access to housing that is:
affordable – taking up no more than 30% of income so they have money left over to meet other needs;
stable – providing families with the consistency they need to maintain jobs, perform well in school, and develop social networks necessary for well-being; 
safe and healthy – protecting families from environmental and social risks from polluted air to lead contamination to gun violence;
accessible – meeting the needs of individuals with disabilities so they can live in their communities;
energy efficient and resilient – reducing our greenhouse gas emissions and withstanding the impacts of climate change; and
located near good schools and with a reasonable commute to their jobs.
