Joe Biden For
The LGBTQ+ Community
Together, We Are Resilient and Strong
Joe Biden believes that every human being should be treated with respect and dignity and be able to live without fear no matter who they are or who they love. During the Obama-Biden Administration, the United States made historic strides toward LGBTQ+ equality—from the repeal of “Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell” to Biden’s historic declaration in support of marriage equality on Meet the Press in 2012 to the unprecedented advancement of protections for LGBTQ+ Americans at the federal level.
Get Involved
Media
Policy
Get Involved
Out for Biden is a national GOTV initiative aimed at engaging LGBTQ+ and pro-equality voters, identifying and registering LGBTQ+ voters in key battleground states, and equipping them with the tools and information needed to ensure we elect Joe Biden in November.
Let’s roll up our sleeves and get to work, take action with our digital toolkit. 
LGBTQ+ Americans are a key component of the diverse coalition Vice President Biden is building to take on Donald Trump in November. As the LGBTQ+ for Biden Team works to engage LGBTQ+ people all across the country, we want to know how youd like to be involved. Sign up here
Media
Catch up with our latest LGBTQ+ content below
LGBTQ+ Social Hour ft. Dr. Jill Biden
Washington Blade - Biden recognizes 50th anniversary of LGBTQ Pride Month
Joseph Biden issued a statement on Monday recognizing June as Pride Month, saying “much work remains” to advance LGBTQ people despite the progress made after the first Pride 50 years ago in memorial of the Stonewall riots.
“Despite our progress, much work remains,” Biden wrote. “As our nation grapples with the uncomfortable truths of systemic racism, a devastating pandemic that’s claimed more than 100,000 lives in the United States and left more than 40 million people filing for unemployment, and a president that’s waged an all-out assault on the rights of our most vulnerable, including LGBTQ+ people, we are reminded of why those first brave souls took to the streets to march 50 years ago.”
Read More
Impact of COVID-19 on the LGBTQ+ Community Roundtable
Welcome to Queens for Biden: A Drag Brunch Extravaganza!
Queer Questions For Joe Biden’s LGBTQ+ Vote Director
Campaigning in the age of the coronavirus has shifted to online for Biden and Sanders, and for President Trump, it appears to have shifted to the White House Press Briefing Room and Rose Garden. Watching the president and his statements closely for their impact on queer Americans is a man named Reggie Greer, the former director of constituent engagement at the LGBTQ Victory Institute, who last month was selected by Biden as his director of the LGBTQ+ vote effort for his campaign.
Read More
Vice President Joe Biden's Remarks at HRC Columbus Dinner
Policy
This fight’s not over. As President, Biden will stand with the LGBTQ+ community to ensure America finally lives up to the promise on which it was founded: equality for all. He will provide the moral leadership to champion equal rights for all LGBTQ+ people, fight to ensure our laws and institutions protect and enforce their rights, and advance LGBTQ+ equality globally.
Biden will:
Protect LGBTQ+ people from discrimination.
Support LGBTQ+ youth.
Protect LGBTQ+ individuals from violence and work to end the epidemic of violence against the transgender community, particularly transgender women of color.
Expand access to high-quality health care for LGBTQ+ individuals.
Ensure fair treatment of LGBTQ+ individuals in the criminal justice system.
Collect data necessary to fully support the LGBTQ+ community.
Advance global LGBTQ+ rights and development.
