Joe Biden has an unmatched record of working for women – for our health care, our paychecks, our safety, and our families. But he knows there is more to be done, so he’s fighting with us for more progress. 
Join us and help Joe win.
For Our Health Care 
Joe’s Record
The Affordable Care Act was  and still is  a big deal, especially for women. Because of Obamacare, over 100 million people no longer have to worry that an insurance company will deny coverage or charge higher premiums just because they have a pre-existing condition, like high blood pressure, asthma, or diabetes. Insurance companies can no longer charge someone more because they are a survivor of domestic violence. Insurance companies can no longer charge someone more because they are a woman. Young adults can get coverage through their parents’ insurance plans until age 26. It’s illegal for health care providers to discriminate against transgender people. Insurance plans have to cover essential benefits like maternity care. And, insurance plans now have to cover critical recommended preventive services like diabetes testing, mammograms, and contraception free of charge. Because of Obamacare, we’ve expanded access to birth control for women across the country. 
Joe’s Plan
As president, Biden will protect and build on Obamacare  not throw it out and start from scratch  to expand access, lower costs, and make quality, affordable health care a right for all. You can read his full plan for building on Obamacare with a new public option here. 
He will champion improving women’s health and our access to health care, and reverse the Trump Administration and states’ all-out assault on women’s right to choose by: 
Giving Americans a new choice, a public health insurance option like Medicare. If your insurance company isn’t doing right by you, you should have another, better choice  and it should cover contraception and respect our constitutional right to choose.
Lowering costs so that buying medicine and paying medical bills don’t bankrupt families. You shouldn’t have to choose between putting food on the table or filling your prescriptions. 
Working to codify Roe v. Wade.
Supporting the repeal of the Hyde Amendment.
Reducing our unacceptably high maternal mortality rate, which disproportionately affects women of color. 
Restoring federal funding for Planned Parenthood, including through Medicaid and Title X. 
For Our Paychecks 
Joe’s Record
The Obama-Biden Administration fought for equal pay for women, debt relief for students and college graduates, and access to education so women could take their skills to the next level through training, community college, and four-year degrees. 
Joe’s Plan
As president, Biden will make sure women of all ages have a fair chance to earn a good living and support themselves and their families by: 
Increasing the federal minimum wage from $7.25 to $15 an hour, ensuring that the women  who make up the majority of minimum wage workers  earn a decent wage and don’t have to work multiple jobs to put food on the table or pay rent.
Preserving and strengthening Social Security, including by providing a higher benefit for the oldest Americans, protecting widows and widowers from steep cuts in benefits, and eliminating penalties for teachers and other public-sector workers. 
Allowing caregivers to make “catch-up” contributions to retirement accounts, even if they’re not earning income in the formal labor market, as has been proposed in bipartisan legislation.
Supporting workers by encouraging and incentivizing unionization and collective bargaining.
Opening doors for educational opportunities by allowing students to attend two years of community college without debt, giving them access to high-quality training and halving the cost of a four-year degree.
Taking on the student debt crisis to provide the women holding two-thirds of all student debt in America a pathway to the middle class. Biden will cut income-based payments in half, to 5% of discretionary income, freeze interest on student loans for individuals making less than $25,000 per year, and make sure public servants actually benefit from public service loan forgiveness. 
For Our Safety 
Joe’s Record
No leader has done more to work to end violence against women than Joe Biden. In 1990, he wrote and spearheaded the groundbreaking Violence Against Women Act at a time when few in Washington cared about domestic violence and sexual assault. He lifted survivors’ voices, won over the skeptics, and pushed until the bill became law in 1994. The Act created a national hotline for victims. It funded shelters and crisis centers. It trained law enforcement in communities across the country so they were better prepared to investigate violence against women and support survivors of violence. And, it helped change the way Americans understand and fundamentally view violence against women. 
Since then, Biden has worked to address violence against women around the world and pushed colleges to take campus sexual assault seriously. In 2011, the Obama-Biden White House sent important guidance to schools spelling out their responsibilities to prevent sexual violence. In 2014, President Obama and Vice President Biden launched It’s On Us, a national movement to end sexual violence on campuses. After leaving the White House, Biden continued his work to change the culture of violence and end campus sexual assault through the Biden Foundation.
Joe’s Plan
As president, Joe Biden will build on his strong track record of getting things done for survivors of gender-based violence by pursuing a bold plan to save more lives and make communities safer for all, by:
Ensuring the reauthorization of and funding for the Violence Against Women Act. Leader Mitch McConnell is currently refusing to allow a vote on the House-passed Violence Against Women Act of 2019. He should bring the bill to the floor long before Joe Biden ever takes the oath of office. But if he doesn’t, President Biden will make sure we reauthorize and expand the Violence Against Women Act and fund its critical programs.
Protecting and supporting young people, Native Americans, military personnel, queer and trans people, and immigrants who are survivors of gender-based violence. 
Getting weapons of war off our streets. Biden will ban the manufacture and sale of assault weapons and high-capacity magazines and give individuals who now possess assault weapons or high-capacity magazines two options: sell the weapons to the government, or register them under the National Firearms Act.
Keeping guns out of dangerous hands. Biden will enact universal background checks. And, he’ll close other loopholes like the the so-called “boyfriend loophole” and “stalking loophole” by prohibiting all individuals convicted of assault, battery, or stalking from purchasing or possessing firearms, regardless of their connection with the victim. 
Establishing a task force on online harassment and abuse to focus on the connection between mass shootings, online harassment, extremism, and violence against women.
Tackling urban gun violence with a new $900 million, 8 year initiative to fund evidence-based interventions in 40 cities across the country.
Ending the rape kit backlog, and ensuring access to justice for survivors who often face a long and difficult journey within the criminal justice system.
Expanding the safety net for survivors of gender-based violence so they have a safe place to live and can support themselves and their families.
Continuing to change the way our culture views sexual violence, gender and racial bias, and harassment.
For Our Families 
Joe’s Record
Joe Biden believes the middle class is not a number, it’s a way of life. Owning a home. Saving for retirement. Paying off your student loans. When he lost his first wife and baby daughter in a car accident, he became a single parent to his two young sons. He’s taken care of aging parents. He knows how hard it is to raise a family, and he knows what it’s like to take care of a sick family member. His experiences have forged his compassion and commitment to helping families struggling through tough times. 
Joe’s Plan
As president, Biden will go to bat for American families by:
Fighting for clean air and clean water, and leading our country and the world to combat the climate emergency. (Read more about Joe’s plan for climate change and environmental justice here.)
Ensuring  Americans have paid time off to take care of a newborn, elderly parent, or sick loved-one.
Investing in our children starting from birth, including universal pre-K for all, so that regardless of their zip code, parents’ income, race, or disability, they are prepared to succeed in tomorrow’s economy.
Expanding access to quality, affordable child care through a tax credit of up to $8,000 per family. 
Helping  Americans pay for long-term care by creating a $5,000 tax credit for informal caregivers, modeled on legislation supported by AARP. 
Allowing caregivers to make “catch-up” contributions to retirement accounts, even if they’re not earning income in the formal labor market, as has been proposed in bipartisan legislation.
A Biden Administration will also fight to ratify the Equal Rights Amendment, so that gender equality is finally enshrined in our Constitution.
