Protecting our planet
Climate change is the most serious threat to humanity today, and we need immediate and bold action to address it before it’s too late. Kirsten believes climate action should be this generation’s moonshot—but to save our planet, the next president has to be willing to take on the climate deniers, polluters, and the oil and gas special interests. Kirsten will, because we can’t afford not to.
Read Kirstens comprehensive plan to combat climate change here.
We need to pass a Green New Deal and get to net-zero emissions.
We’re running out of time to address climate change, and we can’t settle for half-measures. Kirsten was one of the first supporters of the Green New Deal: an ambitious framework to save our planet by investing in infrastructure, creating a green jobs economy, and protecting clean air and water. As president, she would work to get us to net-zero emissions by setting ambitious clean and renewable energy and efficiency standards, eliminating fossil fuel subsidies and creating tax incentives to reward innovation and investment in renewable energy technology, and phasing out fossil fuel production on our public lands and waters. She would also rejoin the Paris climate agreement on day one of her presidency to restore US international climate leadership.
We need to put a price on carbon.
If we’re going to get serious about stopping the effects of climate change, we have to decrease our reliance on fossil fuels—and the worst carbon polluters should pay to fix the damage they have caused. Kirsten would use incentives to steer companies away from fossil fuels and toward clean and renewable energy sources. She would also make climate polluters pay to address the impacts of climate change by establishing a new climate mitigation trust fund paid for by an excise tax on fossil fuel production.
We need to guarantee clean water and clean air as a human right.
The Flint water crisis should have been a nationwide wakeup call on environmental injustice, but the fact is that millions of Americans lack access to clean water and clean air—and low-income communities and communities of color have borne the brunt of those health and economic disparities. Kirsten has fought for years to regulate PFOA/PFAS in drinking water, and introduced the Promoting Infrastructure and Protecting the Economy (PIPE) Act to create a $5 billion federal water infrastructure grant program to provide more tools for communities to address urgent water projects. Read Kirstens plan to repair our infrastructure and protect clean water here.
We need to stand up to special interests and phase out fossil fuels.
Kirsten was one of the first Democratic presidential candidates to sign the No Fossil Fuel Money pledge to reject campaign contributions from fossil fuel executives and PACs. As president, she will stop the expansion of offshore drilling and end new drilling on public lands, limit fracking, and require companies to report climate risks.
