Protecting reproductive rights requires a real, proactive agenda. Here’s mine.
We can’t ensure equal rights for women without reproductive freedom.
Kirsten Gillibrand
May 8 · 3 min read
We’re living in a time when reproductive rights are under attack like never before.
The anti-choice rhetoric of Donald Trump and Mike Pence and the extremists they’ve put on the Supreme Court have emboldened Republicans at the state level to escalate their years-long assault on abortion access and reproductive health care.
Throughout my career I’ve fought for the rights of women as full and equal members of society. We simply can’t accomplish that without the guarantee of reproductive freedom.
Reproductive rights are civil rights, and they are nonnegotiable. I will always defend a woman’s right to make her own personal health decisions, including abortion.
That’s why yesterday, I announced that I will only nominate judges — including Supreme Court justices — who will commit to upholding Roe v. Wade and protecting reproductive rights.
With Republicans waging an unprecedented assault on abortion access, the judiciary is one of our most crucial lines of defense. That’s why I’m drawing a hard line that any judges I appoint will defend women’s health and rights.
But defending our courts from anti-choice extremism is only one front in this fight. The next president needs to prioritize, champion, and expand reproductive rights and access to health care. The stakes for women are too high not to.
So today, I want to expand on the rest of my reproductive rights platform. It’s made up of four key tenets:
1. ACCESS: I will do everything in my power to protect access to safe, legal abortion.
73% of Americans support Roe v. Wade, and women deserve a president who will protect their basic right to make personal health decisions. We have to reject politicians’ efforts to chip away at reproductive health care access in Congress and in states across the country. I would end harmful policies like the Hyde Amendment, which disproportionately restricts access to abortion for low-income women and women of color. And I would repeal President Trump’s gag rule, because no politician should come between doctors and their patients.
2. PREVENTION: I will protect access to health care that prevents unintended pregnancy.
Let’s state the obvious: If politicians really wanted to decrease abortion rates, rather than just interfere in women’s lives, they’d get serious about defending and expanding access to birth control, guaranteeing sex education, and investing in — not gutting — Title X family planning funding. This is basic health care, and we won’t go backward on it.
3. CARE: I will protect doctors and organizations that provide abortion — not defund, silence, criminalize or endanger them.
The lies Donald Trump peddles about abortion providers put them and their patients in grave danger. We must put a stop to clinic violence by protecting the doctors, nurses and clinic workers who provide abortion care. And I will always protect funding for Planned Parenthood, a life-saving, necessary health care provider for millions of Americans.
4. COURTS: I will protect the courts from being taken over by anti-choice extremists.
As president, I will only nominate judges — including Supreme Court justices — who will commit to upholding Roe v. Wade as settled law and protect women’s reproductive rights.
Americans are guaranteed the constitutional right to legal abortion in Roe v. Wade, and it’s past time for Republicans to stop using the issue as a political football. In fact, it’s past time for Republican politicians to stop interfering in women’s personal lives, period.
This isn’t a game. Women’s lives are on the line.
Our right to make personal health decisions for ourselves and our families is nonnegotiable. In the face of relentless attacks from the Trump administration and its allies in Congress, I have always stood up to protect women’s most fundamental human rights.
As president, I won’t just continue to defend women’s civil rights from political attacks — I’ll make guaranteeing those rights a priority. Women are half of this country, and they deserve nothing less.
