How I Will Take Immediate Action to Protect Reproductive Rights as President
Cory Booker
May 22 · 4 min read
Here’s what I will do beginning Day One to advance reproductive rights
Donald Trump and Mike Pence have led an all-out assault on women’s rights — and states across the country have followed. Anti-choice governors and lawmakers are relentless in their charge to chip away at abortion rights and are committed to bringing a case to the Supreme Court that would do away with Roe v. Wade for good.
This coordinated attack on abortion rights and reproductive rights requires a coordinated response. That’s why beginning on Day One of my presidency, I will immediately and decisively take executive action to respond to these relentless efforts to erode Americans’ rights to control their own bodies.
I stand with those leading the fight for reproductive freedom and will continue to fight to protect the constitutional right to abortion and ensure that everyone has real access to reproductive health care. That starts with doing the following:
Nominating judges who are committed to upholding reproductive rights,
Passing legislation to codify the protections guaranteed by Roe v. Wade,
Repealing the Hyde Amendment.
But here’s the thing: We can’t wait for Congress.
Beginning on Day One, here’s what I will do to advance reproductive rights:
Create a White House Office of Reproductive Freedom:
For more than two years under the Trump Administration, we have seen the impact of a relentless and coordinated attack on women. On Day One, I will create a White House Office of Reproductive Freedom, charged with coordinating and affirmatively advancing abortion rights and access to reproductive health care across my Administration — addressing all barriers to full reproductive autonomy, such as access to health care, including maternal and infant health, quality, affordable child care, and comprehensive paid family leave.
End the “domestic gag rule” and expand and modernize the Title X Family Planning Program:
The domestic gag rule prohibits women’s health care providers from discussing with low-income patients how and where to access a safe, legal abortion. It represents a direct attack hit on Title X — the historically bipartisan federal program that provides affordable preventive care and family planning services including birth control — and Planned Parenthood.
As president, I will work to strengthen Title X funding and ensure that all women, no matter their income, have access to a full range of health care options.
Guarantee access to employer-covered contraceptive care:
Contraception is health care, and it can be expensive for women across the country who rely on it, not just to prevent pregnancy, but for a wide range of other medical issues. But the Trump Administration has made it easier to restrict access to contraception without copays, undermining a critical protection under the Affordable Care Act.
It’s simple: Birth control should be covered and protected by the Affordable Care Act.
Repeal Hyde Amendment in first presidential budget:
Abortion care is also health care, but it can be incredibly expensive for women seeking one. For decades, the Hyde Amendment has had a disproportionate impact on abortion access for women who already face barriers to accessing health care, including women of color and low-income women.
By ending the Hyde Amendment, we can take politicians out of decisions between women and their doctors and ensure that abortion care is accessible for all. The first budget I submit to Congress as president will not include Hyde.
Undo Trump’s refusal rules that allow people to be denied the health care they need:
The Trump Administration has proposed new rules that will allow health providers and institutions to more easily refuse to provide health care services to patients seeking care. Access to health care should never be dictated by someone else’s personal beliefs.
As president, I will ensure that every woman is able to receive the health care she needs and has the freedom to make the choices best for her and her family.
Restore evidence-based guidelines for the Teen Pregnancy Prevention Program:
The Trump Administration has prioritized funding abstinence-only programs that ignore years of evidence of what actually works to prevent teen pregnancy. Our students deserve better — that means teaching young people about their full range of health care options, as well as about consent.
End the global gag rule and restore funding for the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA):
President Trump instated and expanded the “global gag rule” — which forbids international organizations that receive federal funding from even mentioning the word abortion — two days after the Women’s March.
On Day One in office, I will rescind this dangerous policy and allow U.S. family planning funds to go to health centers performing essential reproductive health care.
In addition, I will also reinstate the U.S. contribution to the UNFPA, which provides aid for family planning and child and maternal health across the globe. Trump cut off all funding soon after taking office, hurting women and families not just here in the United States, but across the globe.
We must demonstrate better leadership to the rest of the world. It has never been more important to stand in solidarity and join the fight to ensure that all women have access to reproductive health care and abortion rights. James Baldwin once wrote in a letter to Angela Davis “if they take you in the morning, they will be coming for us that night.” These far-right attacks on women’s rights must be understood as an attack on all of our rights.
Add your name here if you support my plan to guarantee a woman’s right to choose and expand access to reproductive health care.
