Health is a human right, and Pete’s plans are ambitious and enduring commitments to that basic truth.
Getting health care in America is too expensive, too complicated, and too frustrating. Our system leaves us feeling powerless and taken advantage of.
We’re at this moment of crisis because of a failure of leadership. For years, Washington politicians have allowed the pharmaceutical industry, giant insurance companies, and powerful hospital systems to profit off of people when they are at their sickest and most vulnerable. We don’t have time to wait for the same Washington politicians to act.
It’s time for a new era of leadership. Pete knows that addressing this national challenge will require a multifaceted approach that isnt anchored by the ideological arguments Washington has been having for decades, but is instead rooted in helping people.
Centered on his Medicare for All Who Want It plan, Petes approach will achieve universal coverage and put Americans back in charge of their health by making care more affordable and giving Americans real choice. Petes vision will build on this with additional plans to lower the cost of prescription drugs, increase equity, protect and expand access to health care for women, drive innovation, and address many other aspects of care.
PART 1: Medicare for All Who Want It
Pete’s plan will create universal coverage and put Americans back in charge of their own health care decisions with affordable insurance and real choice.
PART 2: Improving Mental Health  Combating Addiction
Pete’s vision for the future of mental health and addiction care is rooted in embracing prevention and ensuring that every person feels that they belong in their community and have the support to heal.
PART 3: Securing a Healthy Future for Rural America
Petes plan will ensure that where you live does not determine how healthy you are or how long you live.
PART 4: Affordable Medicine for All
Pete’s plan will ensure that all Americans have access to affordable and safe treatment.
PART 5: A Women’s Health Agenda for the 21st Century
Pete’s plan will improve health access and outcomes for every woman.
PART 6: Long-Term Care
Pete’s plan will not only ensure every American has access to affordable and respectful long-term care, but also protect patient choice.
PART 7: Health Equity  Justice
Pete’s plan will eliminate systemic disparities and empower communities to create a new era of inclusion in health care.
It's up to you!
Pete doesn't take any money from federal lobbyists, corporate PACs, or the fossil fuel industry. Please chip in whatever you can to help build our grassroots movement.   $5
$10
$20.20
$50
$100
Other
If you've saved your information with ActBlue Express, your donation will go through immediately. Contributions or gifts to ActBlue are not deductible as charitable contributions for Federal income tax purposes.
Home
Issues
Meet Pete
Ask Pete
Rules of the Road
Events
Store
Donate
Jobs
Contact Us
Tax Returns
Accessibility
Terms of Service
Privacy Policy
Mayor Pete Buttigieg is a former member of the Navy Reserve. Use of Mayor Buttigieg’s military rank, job titles, and photographs in uniform does not imply endorsement by the Department of the Navy or the Department of Defense.
Paid For By Pete For America
Home
Meet Pete
Climate Change
Douglass Plan for Black America
Economic Agenda for Working Families
Empowering Workers
Health Care
Higher Ed  Workforce Development
K-12  Early  Education
Veterans
See More Plans...
ASK PETE                       Use Our Video Search Tool To Hear From Pete, In His Own Voice, Where He Stands On The Issues
Supporter Toolkit
Take Action
Find an Event
Shop the Store
Donate
En Español
Support Pete's Campaign
Pete doesn't take any money from federal lobbyists, corporate PACs, or the fossil fuel industry. Please chip in whatever you can to help build our grassroots movement.
$5
$10
$20.20
$50
$100
Other
If you've saved your information with ActBlue Express, your donation will go through immediately.
Pete’s getting ready for New Hampshire! Take our important pre-primary survey.
Support our campaign as we continue to make history.
Pete doesnt take any money from federal lobbyists, corporate PACs, or the fossil fuel industry. Please chip in whatever you can to help build our grassroots movement.
$5
$10
$25
$100
$1000
Other
If you've saved your information with ActBlue Express, your donation will go through immediately.
