Belonging, Opportunity, Empowerment
An Agenda for Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders
The story of Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders (AAPIs) in the United States is far from a single narrative, as it consists of many unique experiences and remarkable contributions. Trailblazers like Wong Kim Ark and Patsy Takemoto Mink advanced fundamental rights, from birthright citizenship to Title IX of the Higher Education Act, which requires equal treatment of women. Cambodian and Vietnamese refugees made courageous journeys to rebuild their lives and start new businesses and communities in America. The 442nd Regiment, composed almost entirely of Japanese American soldiers, became one of the most decorated units in military history; as they fought fascism abroad during World War II, other Japanese Americans faced internment by their own country.Defense.gov. “Go for Broke: Army Units Motto Now a National Day.” U.S. Army. April 5, 2019. CEOs such as Indra Nooyi and Andrea Jung have led some of our nation’s most successful companies that employ thousands of Americans. AAPI communities include Americans from over 30 countries of origin and ethnic groups who speak over 100 different languages.“Data and Data Disaggregation.” White House Initiative on Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders.
The potential of AAPIs to lead, reshape, and inspire our nation has never been greater. AAPIs are the fastest-growing racial group in America,Lu, Chris. “Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders Are Often Ignored.” Time. October 20, 2017. having grown by 25 percent between 2010 and 2017— nearly five times faster than the general population. “Spotlight on Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders in the United States.” New American Economy Research Fund. July 9, 2019. Yet every single opportunity and advancement for AAPIs has been won despite systemic racism and discrimination. The “model minority” myth obscures the fact that income inequality among AAPIs is now higher than among any other racial demographic.Lam, Charles. “Asian Americans Now Most Economically Divided Group in U.S., Report Finds.” NBC News. July 12, 2018. 17 percent of Thai Americans live in poverty, as do 20 percent of Cambodian Americans.Ramakrishnan, Karthick. “Infographic: AA Poverty (2015).” AAPI Data. The rate of tuberculosis among Native Hawaiians and Pacific Islanders is 38 times the rate among white Americans.“Profile: Native Hawaiians/Pacific Islanders.” Office of Minority Health. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. January 31, 2020. Coronary heart disease is especially prevalent in the Filipino American population.Bhimla, Aisha, Lauren Yap, Minsun Lee, Brenda Seals, Hermie Aczon, and Grace X. Ma. “Addressing the Health Needs of High-Risk Filipino Americans in the Greater Philadelphia Region.” Journal of Community Health 42, no. 2 (2016): 269–77. And the current administration’s anti-Muslim policies have stoked prejudice and hatred against South Asian and Southeast Asian communities nationwide.
The potential of AAPIs to lead, reshape, and inspire our nation has never been greater.
Pete recognizes that we must overcome the challenges facing AAPI communities by understanding the distinct barriers that affect each community and developing a comprehensive strategy to dismantle these barriers. Like so many others, AAPIs aspire for each generation to be better off than the last, in all aspects of their lives. This is why Pete’s extensive investments in education, health, immigration reform, and economic growth will work together as a holistic agenda to empower AAPI families to pursue every opportunity that America offers. He will ensure that AAPI individuals can live their lives with a sense of security and a feeling of belonging in a nation that values their unique stories and contributions.
Key policies include:
Education
Invest $700 billion in early childhood education, which will include increased investments in dual language learning programs.
Double the proportion of teachers and school leaders of color within 10 years.
Combat bullying and create safe learning environments with a School Climate Innovation Fund.
Make college free or subsidized for all students from families with incomes under $150,000.
Invest $50 billion in Minority Serving Institutions, including Asian American and Native American Pacific Islander-Serving Institutions.
Expand access to workforce training programs, including career and technical education and Registered Apprenticeships.
Economic Empowerment
Invest $10 billion in women-owned and minority-owned businesses.
Expand access to capital by removing collateral requirements for microloans and providing $1 billion in loan guarantees for microlending.
Award at least 25 percent of federal contracts to women-owned and minority-owned businesses
Require all businesses over $20 million in revenue that are competing for federal contracts to pay suppliers in full within 45 days on average.
Strengthen labor protections for all workers, including gig economy and domestic workers.
Invest $430 billion in expanding access to affordable housing for AAPI families.
Provide reliable transportation, clean drinking water, and safe school buildings to all AAPI communities through Pete’s $1 trillion infrastructure plan.
Health
Provide all AAPIs with health coverage through Medicare for All Who Want It.
Promote health equity for AAPIs through a National Health Equity Strategy that includes investments in community health centers and health careers for underrepresented groups.
Expand funding for research on health disparities that affect AAPI populations.
Reduce preventable deaths in AAPI communities by increasing access to disease screenings for conditions like Hepatitis B and cancer.
Invest $300 billion in culturally appropriate, linguistically accessible mental health care.
Reduce the price of prescription drugs, such as insulin, that Americans need.
Provide dignity and security in retirement for older AAPIs by creating a long-term care insurance. program and increasing resources to support aging at home and unpaid family caregivers.
Immigration
Streamline and simplify the process for 1.5 million AAPIS to become U.S. citizens.
Expand the number of family reunification visas available and eliminate discriminatory per-country caps.
Establish a flexible employment-based visa system that can adjust to the economy’s needs.
Create a pathway to permanent residence and citizenship for 1.7 million undocumented AAPIs.
Reform the immigration enforcement process to better uphold due process and the rule of law.
Combat human trafficking and other crimes against immigrants.
End the Muslim ban immediately.
Increase resources for refugee settlement.
Community Empowerment
Ensure that all federal agencies collect and use disaggregated data for AAPI communities.
Improve language access for federal programs.
Restore trust in the Census for 2030 through increased outreach and language access, and correct the effects of undercounting in the 2020 Census.
Make it easier to vote and to access language assistance when voting.
Celebrate, document, and preserve AAPI history and culture.
Increase support for initiatives to protect Native Hawaiian lands, language, and culture.
Safety & Security
Invest $1 billion in helping law enforcement agencies combat white nationalism and terrorism.
Vigorously enforce federal laws against hate crimes and racial profiling to protect AAPI communities.
Support AAPI veterans and members of the military, and honor them for their crucial contributions.
Pass common-sense gun laws including background checks, an assault weapons ban, and reforms to prevent anyone convicted of a hate crime from owning a gun.
Address climate change by making the U.S. a net-zero emissions society by 2050 and protecting communities from natural disasters.
Ensure that AAPIs play a leadership role in all aspects of foreign policy for Asian countries.
Climate Change
Douglass Plan for Black America
Economic Agenda for Working Families
Empowering Workers
Health Care
Veterans
