Petes plan for affordable health care for all
Pete’s Plan - Medicare For All Who Want It
Pete is proposing a bold new approach to health care — Medicare for All Who Want It. His plan will achieve universal access to health care coverage while lowering costs, making health care more affordable, and preserving Americans ability to choose whats best for themselves and their families.
We must ensure that everyone has an affordable option for health coverage that guarantees access to care when they need it.
Get the facts
Medicare for All Who Want It will ensure that every American has access to affordable coverage through a public insurance alternative, like Medicare. Under Petes plan, private plans have to compete with the public alternative, which forces them to offer better and more affordable care. Here are the facts:
Pete’s Medicare for All Who Want It
Medicare for All Who Want It will give everyone the choice to be covered by an affordable, comprehensive public plan.
Medicare for All Who Want It will automatically enroll the uninsured and retroactively enroll those who fall through the cracks in the public plan.
Pete’s plan won’t eliminate Medicare Advantage, which currently serves 22 million Americans.
Pete’s Medicare for All Who Want It plan won’t pass costs onto the middle class. It will be fully paid for by rolling back the Trump corporate tax cuts and by empowering the federal government to negotiate drug prices with pharmaceutical companies.
Medicare for All Who Want It will incentivize private insurers to cut costs and improve care in order to keep customers. 
Pete believes his public plan will create a path to Medicare for All. Pete’s plan gives the American people a choice and trusts them to set the pace at which our country moves in a better direction on health care.
Q: Will Pete’s “Medicare for All Who Want It” plan be affordable?
Pete Buttigieg’s health care plan will be affordable for every American. Pete will expand premium subsidies for low-income Americans, cap premium payments at 8.5% of income, cap out-of-pocket spending on prescription drugs, cap out-of-network rates, and end surprise billing. 
Q: Is Pete’s “Medicare for All Who Want It” plan fully paid for?
Yes, Pete’s Medicare for All Who Want It plan will cost about $1.5 trillion over 10 years. It will be paid for by rolling back the Trump corporate tax cuts, which will generate $1.4 trillion in revenue, and from cost savings that result from empowering the federal government to negotiate drug prices with pharmaceutical companies.
Q: How would Pete take on the health insurance industry?
Pete’s Medicare for All Who Want It plan to achieve universal access to health care would create more competition in the marketplace, incentivizing incentivize insurers to lower costs and improve care, or they’ll lose customers. It would also limit out-of-network costs and end surprise billing. That’s why the health insurance industry has attacked Pete’s plan since the day it was introduced.
Q: How would Pete hold big pharma and the health insurance industry accountable?
As Mayor, Pete sued opioid manufacturers and distributors for their role in exacerbating the opioid crisis in South Bend -- and he would hold them accountable as President. Pete’s Affordable Medicines plan will crack down on price gouging by imposing fines and taking away patents from the worst offenders. Pete would also lower the costs of prescription drugs and cap out-of-pocket monthly prescription drug costs.
Health is a human right, and Pete’s plans are ambitious and enduring commitments to that basic truth.
Public Lands
Housing Justice
Climate Change
Douglass Plan for Black America
Economic Agenda for Working Families
Empowering Workers
Health Care
Veterans
