In our country, the more than 27 million people who are uninsured are either paying too much for care or not getting the care they need because it’s too expensive.Key Facts about the Uninsured Population.” Kaiser Family Foundation. December 7, 2018. Uninsured individuals are less likely to access crucial preventive services—such as cancer screenings or cholesterol checksGarfield, Rachel, Kendal Orgera, and Anthony Damico. “The Uninsured and the ACA: A Primer - Key Facts about Health Insurance and the Uninsured amidst Changes to the Affordable Care Act.” Kaiser Family Foundation. January 25, 2019.—and more likely to forego care for chronic conditions, such as diabetes or heart disease. And 87 million people are underinsured, which means they’re also paying too much for care, in the form of high deductibles or out-of-pocket costs that make them more likely to struggle to pay for care or skip it altogether.Collins, Sarah R., Herman K. Bhupal, and Michelle M. Doty. “Health Insurance Coverage Eight Years After the ACA.” Commonwealth Fund. February 7, 2019. We must ensure that everyone has an affordable option for health coverage that guarantees access to care when they need it.
We must ensure that everyone has an affordable option for health coverage that guarantees access to care when they need it.
Through Pete’s Medicare for All Who Want It plan, everyone will be able to opt in to an affordable, comprehensive public alternative. This affordable public plan will incentivize private insurers to compete on price and bring down costs. If private insurers are not able to offer something dramatically better, this public plan will create a natural glide-path to Medicare for All. The choice of a public plan empowers people to make their own decisions regarding the type of health care that makes sense for them by leveling the playing field between patients and the health care system. It gives the American people a choice and trusts them to set the pace at which our country moves in a better direction on health care.
Pete’s Medicare for All Who Want It plan will cost about $1.5 trillion over 10 years. It will be paid for by rolling back the Trump corporate tax cuts, which will generate $1.4 trillion in revenue, and the rest from cost savings that result from empowering the federal government to negotiate drug prices with pharmaceutical companies.
Read Petes full plan to ensure affordability and choice in our health care system.
Pete’s coverage and affordability plan includes the following policy proposals:
Because health care is a human right, guarantee universal coverage through Medicare for All Who Want It.
The Medicare for All Who Want It public alternative will help America reach universal coverage by providing an affordable insurance option to the currently uninsured. The public alternative will provide the same essential health benefits as those currently available on the marketplaces and ensure that everyone has access to high-quality, comprehensive coverage.
The plan will automatically enroll individuals in affordable coverage if they are eligible for it, while those eligible for subsidized coverage will have a simple enrollment option. A backstop fund will reimburse health care providers for unpaid care to patients who are uninsured. Individuals who fall through the cracks will be retroactively enrolled in the public option.
End surprise billing.
Most commonly, unexpected bills arise when a patient receives care at an in-network hospital and, unbeknownst to them, is treated by an out-of-network physician.Lewis, David. “The changing landscape of out-of-network reimbursement.” Milliman White Paper. September 2018. This mismatch is a deliberate business strategy fueled by profit-driven firms in private equity.Kellett, Hunter, Alexander Spratt, and Mark Miller. “Surprise billing: choosing patients over profits.” Health Affairs. August 12, 2019. About one in five visits to the emergency room is likely to lead to a surprise bill.
Pete will require that bills related to in-network facilities be billed as in-network. His plan will also place limits on what out-of-network providers, including ambulances and air ambulance services, can charge.
Read Pete’s full plan to help those hit hardest by rising health care costs.
Expand premium subsidies for low-income people to make marketplace coverage dramatically more affordable for individuals and families.
Pete will make premium subsidies more generous for low-income people. Today, a family of three making $31,000 a year pays about $1,200 annually for “silver” coverage on the marketplace.Scott, Dylan. “House Democrats new plan to strengthen Obamacare, explained.” Vox. March 26, 2019. Under Pete’s plan, they will pay a maximum of roughly $600 a year for higher quality (i.e., gold-level) coverage.
Cap marketplace premium payments at 8.5% of income for everyone, which will primarily help middle-income individuals and families.
This plan will also extend the subsidies to more middle-income people by capping premium payments for everyone. That means that the 60-year-old in Iowa making $50,000 and currently paying $12,000 annually in premiums will now pay no more than $4,250 annually for gold coverage. Pete will also lower out-of-pocket costs for consumers by increasing cost-sharing assistance.
Cap out-of-pocket costs for seniors on Medicare, with a lower cap for low-income seniors.
One in four Medicare beneficiaries—15 million people—spend over 20 percent of their income on premiums and medical care.Schoen, Cathy, Karen Davis, and Amber Willinik. “Medicare beneficiaries high out-of-pocket costs: costs burden by income and health status.” The Commonwealth Fund. May 12, 2017. Costs run much higher for many, including those with chronic disease and disability. The traditional Medicare program does not have a cap on out-of-pocket spending, putting seniors at risk of having medical or drug costs wipe out their savings. Pete believes that seniors in traditional Medicare deserve the same financial protection. He will improve affordability in Medicare by capping out-of-pocket costs, with lower caps for low-income seniors.
Ensure that non-profit hospitals truly serve their communities by strengthening hospital community benefit requirements and ending predatory billing practices.
Non-profit hospitals do not pay federal taxes under the assumption that they benefit their communities, such as by providing free care to uninsured patients and offering medical training.Hostetter, Martha and Sarah Klein. “In Focus: Hospitals Invest in Building Stronger, Healthier Communities.” Commonwealth Fund. September 23, 2016. By strengthening community benefit requirements, Pete will ensure that hospitals are investing in the health of their patients and communities rather than punishing those who can’t afford the care they need. This will include ending predatory billing practices that prey on vulnerable patients.Beil, Laura. “As patients struggle with bills, hospital sues thousands.” The New York Times. September 3, 2019. Hancock, Jay and Elizabeth Lucas. “‘UVA has ruined us’: Health system sues thousands of patients, seizing patients and putting liens on home.” The Washington Post. September 9, 2019.
Limit what health care providers, including hospitals, can charge for out-of-network care at twice what Medicare pays for the same service.
Health providers often charge private insurers exorbitant fees. As hospital prices for outpatient care increase at a rate four times faster than physician prices,Rosenthal, Elizabeth. “That beloved hospital? It’s driving up health costs.” The New York Times. September 1, 2019. hospital profits have risen to their highest levels in decades.Gee, Emily. “The High Price of Hospital Care.” Center for American Progress. June 26, 2019. As President, Pete will prohibit health care providers from pricing irresponsibly. This will also provide insurers with leverage to demand lower rates for in-network care.Chernew, Michael, et al. “The case for market-based price caps.” Health Affairs. September 3, 2019. As noted in our rural health plan, for these providers in underserved areas, Pete’s administration will increase Medicare reimbursement rates and encourage states to increase Medicaid reimbursement rates.
Read Pete’s full plan to ensure our system is people—not profit—focused.
Make it easier to afford and find care for mental health and substance use disorder by enforcing parity.
“Mental health parity” means that coverage and treatment for mental health and substance use disorder are provided on equal terms as treatment for physical conditions. Pete will enforce parity in several ways, including requiring health plans to annually report how they manage and meet parity. Health plans that violate this policy will face fines and statutory penalties. Those plans most often out of compliance will be publicly named.
Mental Health Care
Pete understands that we must begin to take mental health more seriously. Read his plan to promote healing and belonging in America.
Read More
Tackle high administrative costs to further bring down the costs of health care in America.
Our health care system is the most costly in the world in part because it spends $496 billion annually on administrative costs—more than any other system globally.Gee, Emily and Topher Spiro. “Excess administrative costs burden the U.S. health care system.” Center for American Progress. April 8, 2019. To lower cost and improve quality, we must make our health care system more efficient. Pete’s plan will do this by harmonizing standards for transactions and holding insurance companies accountable for adopting them. It will simplify billing by creating a central clearinghouse for claims,Emanuel, Ezekiel. “Democrats are having the wrong health care debate.” The New York Times. August 2, 2019. establish an All-Payer Claims Database that supports health care quality initiatives,Calsyn, Maura. “Policy options to encourage all-payer claims databases.” Center for American Progress. April 20, 2018. and require integration of electronic records.
Empower the federal government to better monitor and challenge more health care mergers, which often raise the cost of care without improving outcomes.
Health insurers, hospitals, pharmaceutical companies, and health care provider groups are all growing larger, but bigger has not been better for patients. Greater consolidation among providers and insurers results in higher prices for patients without improving quality. To ensure robust competition in health care markets and protect patients, Pete will increase funding for federal antitrust authorities to empower them to review more mergers and equip them to bring enforcement cases against activity that harms competition and hurts health care workers.
Read Pete’s full plan to guarantee access to quality, affordable health care.
By making care more affordable and available to everyone, we will finally put Americans back in charge of their own health care decisions. If you’re with us, text HEALTH to 25859.
By submitting your cell phone number you are agreeing to receive periodic text messages from Pete for America. Message and data rates may apply. Text HELP for more information. Text STOP to stop receiving messages.
Footnotes
It's up to you!
Pete doesn't take any money from federal lobbyists, corporate PACs, or the fossil fuel industry. Please chip in whatever you can to help build our grassroots movement.   $5
$10
$20.20
$50
$100
Other
If you've saved your information with ActBlue Express, your donation will go through immediately. Contributions or gifts to ActBlue are not deductible as charitable contributions for Federal income tax purposes.
Home
Issues
Meet Pete
Ask Pete
Rules of the Road
Events
Store
Donate
Jobs
Contact Us
Tax Returns
Accessibility
Terms of Service
Privacy Policy
Mayor Pete Buttigieg is a former member of the Navy Reserve. Use of Mayor Buttigieg’s military rank, job titles, and photographs in uniform does not imply endorsement by the Department of the Navy or the Department of Defense.
Paid For By Pete For America
Home
Issues
Immigration
Agenda for Latinos
K-12  Early  Education
Health Equity  Justice
Retirement  Long-Term Care
Education  Workforce Development
Veterans  Military Community
Working Families
Disability and Inclusion
Criminal Justice Reform
Agenda for Women
Indian Country
LGBTQ+
A New Era for Health
Disaster Preparedness
Climate Change
Unleash Rural Opportunity
Preventing Gun Violence
Empower Workers
The Douglass Plan
A New Call to Service
More Issues...
Meet Pete
Get Involved
Ask Pete
Events
Design Toolkit
Store
Donate
En Español
Support Pete's Campaign
Pete doesn't take any money from federal lobbyists, corporate PACs, or the fossil fuel industry. Please chip in whatever you can to help build our grassroots movement.
$5
$10
$20.20
$50
$100
Other
If you've saved your information with ActBlue Express, your donation will go through immediately.
Learn how Pete's plans will improve your every day life
Keep up with events, merch releases, and other campaign updates
Find out how you can get involved and join #TeamPete
Support our bold vision for the future
Pete doesn't take any money from federal lobbyists, corporate PACs, or the fossil fuel industry. Please chip in whatever you can to help build our grassroots movement.
$5
$20.20
$50
$100
$1000
Other
If you've saved your information with ActBlue Express, your donation will go through immediately.
