Shelter is one of the most basic human needs. But a home is more than just having a roof over our heads—it is a place to call our own, a source of dignity and security, and an opportunity to build wealth over generations.
Yet every day, over a half million Americans experience homelessness—a rate that has risen in recent years—and tens of millions of families worry about losing their homes. This is a crisis not just for the poor, but even for those that most Americans would consider middle-income. In Charleston, South Carolina, a typical bank teller can’t afford to rent a one-bedroom apartment at the median price of $1,113. In Los Angeles, California, a bookkeeper or school bus driver can’t afford to rent a one-bedroom apartment, which rents on average for $1,340 per month.
Low-income families who rent face the risk of rising rent or eviction. The lucky few who find affordable housing rarely find it near transit, jobs, or neighborhood necessities. These challenges are particularly acute in communities of color, where generations of government and private sector policies have restricted opportunities to build wealth and access opportunity. Families who were redlined into neighborhoods now risk being gentrified out of them as they gain in market value. Families looking to achieve the dream of homeownership instead face a maze of obstacles that only seem to grow more challenging.
All across the country, communities are still waiting on Washington to help them recover from the 2008 financial crisis brought on by mortgage and foreclosure abuse. Working families lost homes they had owned for generations—and no one faced real accountability for the fraud and abuse that enabled the system to fail. In fact, some of the very same Wall Street executives who helped to precipitate this crisis now serve in Donald Trump’s cabinet.
Pete is committed to housing justice. As President, he will use housing policy at every level of government as a tool to address injustices, reverse the discriminatory impacts of racist redlining, and build pathways to lasting economic and social opportunity.
Pete’s vision for housing will invest in long-underfunded programs that provide critical support to families, and will help cities and states innovate to improve housing affordability and stability. He will institute policies to reverse the intentional exclusion of people of color from homeownership, combat the moral crisis of homelessness, and stop lead poisoning from injuring our most vulnerable. He will appoint Cabinet leaders who are committed to fair housing and racial and economic justice.
In a Buttigieg administration, families across the country will have greater access to affordable housing and communities will have the building blocks for inclusive revitalization. His administration will right the wrongs of the housing crisis, including by establishing strong consumer protections and implementing policies to rebalance our economy in favor of American families. And it will reverse the effects of many generations of policy that locked some Americans out of homeownership and a place to live in neighborhoods of economic opportunity.
As President, Pete will:
Unlock access to safe and healthy affordable housing for over 7 million American families, starting by supporting the construction or renovation of over 2 million rental units.
All Americans deserve access to safe, affordable housing, yet over 30 percent of U.S. households pay nearly a third of their income on rent and almost half of those pay over half of their income on rent.Veal, Sean, and Jonathan Spader. “Nearly a Third of American Households Were Cost-Burdened Last Year.” Joint Center for Housing Studies of Harvard University. December 7, 2018. Pete’s labor and economic policies will raise incomes for workers–but he will also take strong action to address the lack of decent, affordable housing that has created crisis conditions in cities and towns across America.
Pete knows that housing needs in different parts of America are not the same. The crisis of housing affordability for low-income residents in coastal cities has captured national attention. Yet distressed communities in the Midwest, the South, and elsewhere struggle with population loss, vacant and blighted property, and stagnating local economies.
Pete will unlock access to safe and healthy affordable housing for over 7 million American families, starting by supporting the construction or renovation of over 2 million rental units. He will:
Support the construction, maintenance, and operation of over 1.4 million new units of affordable housing for the lowest-income Americans through over $150 billion in new National Housing Trust funds plus an additional state or local match.
Construct over half a million new affordable housing units by increasing investment in the Low-Income Housing Tax Credit by 50 percent over five years.
Create good jobs and lower development costs by growing the construction industry, especially for low-income Americans, women, and people of color.
Promote more resilient, accessible, and safe housing and community development.
Support locally-directed affordable housing and community development by doubling funding for the Community Development Block Grants and expanding the HOME Investment Partnership Program.
Work with local leaders to tailor housing policy to address different geographic, market, and community conditions–from rural Americans and seniors, to college students and people with disabilities.
Press municipalities to conduct community-oriented reviews of local affordable housing policy, including zoning requirements. Implement progressive restrictions of federal funding in municipalities with the highest rent burdens and most restrictive zoning requirements, and encourage smart building and zoning to increase resilience.
Ensure a strong Community Reinvestment Act.
Invest up to $50 billion to modernize and repair public housing and ensure safe and stable housing for residents, including by eliminating lead hazards.
Promote environmentally sustainable and resilient practices in housing development.
Preserve existing affordable housing.
Build pathways to affordable homeownership while also ensuring that homeownership is not the only means to housing stability and building wealth.
Homeownership is one of the primary ways that Americans have built wealth over the past 50 years. Investing in affordable homeownership can help ensure that neighborhood development lifts up residents rather than displaces them.On average financial returns to homeownership are better than returns to renting, even if renters were to invest in stocks and bonds in equivalent amounts to home equity. See Goodman, Laurie, and Christopher Mayer. “Homeownership Is Still Financially Better than Renting.” Urban Institute. February 21, 2018. But access to homeownership has not been equal: from the New Deal to the G.I. Bill, federal policy has directly invested in white Americans’ homeownership while intentionally excluding Black Americans and other Americans of color. As a result, the racial homeownership gap is worse today than when racial discrimination was legal.Carr, James H., Michela Zonta, Steven P. Hornburg, and William Spriggs. “2019 State of Housing in Black America.” National Association of Real Estate Brokers.
Enable 1 million households to become first-time homebuyers by investing $4 billion in matching funds to scale successful low-income homeownership programs.
Work with Congress to ensure equal access to an affordable 30-year, fixed-rate mortgage for working families.
Fight discrimination in the home mortgage market, reverse the Trump administration’s assault on the Fair Housing Act, and increase the homeownership rate for communities of color.
Prioritize the American people over corporate profits.
The foreclosure crisis sent shockwaves through America, destroying family assets and plunging entire communities into financial instability. Driving down the street, foreclosure notices were visible on every door in some communities. Neighborhoods were broken up, and families left behind schools, jobs and properties they had sacrificed to afford.
And the impact of the crisis is still felt in communities across the country. American homeownership has plunged to its lowest rate in over half a century; the number of single-family rentals has increased by 2.8 million.Raymond, Elora Lee, Richard Duckworth, Benjamin Miller, Michael Lucas, and Shiraj Pokharel. “From Foreclosure to Eviction: Housing Insecurity in Corporate-Owned Single-Family Rentals.” Cityscape 20, no. 3 (2018): 159–188 During the Great Recession, banks, hedge funds, and corporations purchased large swathes of foreclosed single-family homes, in which families that used to own them now pay rent to live.
The foreclosure crisis and expansion to single-family rental properties have particularly impacted Black families. For a typical Black family, median wealth in 2031 will be almost $98,000 lower than it would have been without the housing crisis.Burd-Sharp, Sarah and Rebecca Rasch. “Impact of the US Housing Crisis on the Racial Wealth Gap Across Generations,” Social Science Research Council. June 2015.
To prevent another housing crisis, expand access to affordable housing, and hold Wall Street accountable for taking advantage of American families, Pete will:
Prevent the concentration of housing ownership stock in a small number of Wall Street hedge funds and private equity funds.
Hold bank executives and mortgage lenders criminally liable for robo-signing and other housing market abuses.
Strengthen the Consumer Finance Protection Bureau and vigorously enforce consumer protections in the mortgage lending market.
Support Americans who faced foreclosure in returning to homeownership through expanded federally-backed affordable mortgages, homeownership counseling, and a new loan guarantee program to finance homeownership in distressed communities.
Pass a National Housing Act for the 21st Century. Just as President Johnson passed the Fair Housing Act in 1968, Pete will work with Congress to regulate the activity of interstate landlords.
Fight to solve homelessness.
Homelessness isn’t just a public policy or public health problem; it’s a moral one. Many are families with children–and while most are living in shelters, some children are sleeping in tents, on sidewalks, and in vehicles tonight in America. Homelessness takes a disproportionate toll on children and people of color; Black Americans account for 40 percent of people experiencing homelessness and half of homeless families with children.Wilitz, Teresa “‘A Pileup of Inequities’: Why People of Color Are Hit Hardest by Homelessness.” The Pew Trust. March 29, 2019.
And while homelessness overall has declined over the past decade, unsheltered homelessness has reached crisis conditions in America’s cities, large and small.Henry, Meghan, Rian Watt, Anna Mahathey, Jillian Ouellette, and Aubrey Sitler. “The 2019 Annual Homeless Assessment Report (AHAR) to Congress.” U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. January 2020. As President, Pete will:
End family homelessness through an additional $4 billion dollars to provide rapid re-housing and permanent supportive housing to families.
End veteran homelessness by funding permanent supportive housing and rapid re-housing and by encouraging the Department of Veterans Affairs to partner with cities, states, and community groups to provide targeted services.
End youth homelessness through an additional $500 million for rapid-rehousing supports, transitional housing beds, and housing support for youth exiting foster care.
Invest an additional $1.5 billion in permanent supportive housing for unaccompanied adults experiencing chronic homelessness.
Deliver a $3 billion homelessness emergency funding package to highly impacted cities to rapidly improve conditions on our streets.
Prevent 100,000 Americans from becoming homeless in the first place with $1 billion in new homeless prevention programming to communities.
End the incarceration to homelessness pipeline with $1 billion in jail and prison in-reach programs to help identify returning citizens at risk of housing instability.
Overturn discriminatory rules that weaken efforts to end homelessness
Improve access to affordable and high-quality mental health and addiction treatment.
Combat discrimination and predatory practices in housing and housing finance.
The history of housing policy in America is rife with injustice. From the New Deal and G.I. Bill to the Fair Housing Act and beyond, our country used housing to create and sustain the middle- and upper-middle class while precluding other (mostly Black) Americans from the prosperity it created. These efforts segregated neighborhoods and concentrated poverty.
The vast majority of neighborhoods that were redlined nearly 100 years ago remain disproportionately poor and segregated to this day.Mitchell, Bruce and Juan Franco. HOLC “Redlining” Maps: The Persistent Structure Of Segregation And Economic Inequality” March 20, 2018. From redlining to racist mortgage covenants, it will take decades of intentional policy to undo our past wrongs. Pete will:
Fully reinstate the Affirmatively Furthering Fair Housing Rule.
Promote inclusive development and combat gentrification and displacement.
Ban source-of-income discrimination against tenants.
Expand protections against tenant discrimination, including by passing the Equality Act and supporting local efforts to develop landlord risk mitigation funds support efforts and to ensure people with criminal justice records have better access to housing.
Combat the racial wealth gap and revitalize communities by passing the Community Homestead Act.
Expand housing assistance to nearly 5 million more families with children.
Housing Choice Vouchers, or Section 8 vouchers, provide crucial income support to families with the greatest need of housing assistance. But today, only one-fifth of households eligible for housing assistance receive it and families can stay on waitlists for years in a cruel lottery of opportunity.Samantha Batko, Susan J. Popkin, and Nicole DuBois. “The Case for More, Not Less.” Urban Institute. January 2018. Well-directed vouchers have the potential to expand economic opportunity for children, driving hundreds of thousands of dollars in future earnings and providing a foundation for families to thrive.Bergman, Peter, Raj Chetty, Stefanie Deluca, Nathaniel Hendren, Lawrence Katz, and Christopher Palmer. “Creating Moves to Opportunity: Experimental Evidence on Barriers to Neighborhood Choice.” Opportunity Insights. August 2019.
Ensure that all eligible families with children–nearly 5 million nationwide–receive housing assistance. Devote over $160 billion in new funding to support every eligible family in accessing housing choice vouchers.
Enhance opportunity for families by providing mobility counseling and placement support.
Reduce barriers to accessing public housing and expand opportunities for residents, such as internet access and integrative case management that addresses needs in other areas like employment, health, child care, and financial management.
Prevent evictions and reduce their harms.
Eviction is profoundly destabilizing. Children come home from school to find toys and furniture piled on the curb. A parent struggles to find short-term solutions and maintain a sense of normalcy while beginning the search for housing they can afford, with daunting new security deposits and application fees.
Eviction disproportionately harms low-income women, especially women of color and victims of domestic violence.Desmond, Matthew. Evicted: Poverty and Profit in the American City. Large print ed. Farmington Hills, Michigan: Thorndike Press, A part of Gale, a Cengage Company, 2017. More often than not, households with an eviction judgement have children. Over 7 million evictions took place in 2016, even though just a quarter were formally court-ordered.Gross, Terry. “First-Ever Evictions Database Shows: Were In the Middle Of A Housing Crisis.” NPR. April 12, 2018., Holder, Sarah, “Where Evictions Hurt the Most.” CityLab. October 30, 2017. And eviction has enormous social and economic consequences for families and children that cost far more over time. Children are more likely to change schools or struggle in school, adults are more likely to lose or leave jobs, and an eviction record creates a barrier to finding new housing.Desmond, Matthew, Weihua An, Richelle Winkler, and Thomas Ferriss. “Evicting Children.” Social Forces 92, no. 1 (2013): 303–327., Desmond, Matthew and Carl Gerhenson, “Housing and Employment Insecurity among the Working Poor.” Social Problems (2016): 1–22.
To reduce evictions and lessen the consequences when they do happen, Pete will:
Establish an emergency rental assistance fund to keep families in their homes.
Support states in establishing legal remedies to eviction, including civil Gideon laws, programs to provide eviction counsel, and diversion housing courts.
Strengthen tenant protections and end harmful profiteering.
Support transparency reforms that track high-eviction landlords and prevent them from hiding behind private companies.
All Americans deserve the dignity and security provided by safe, affordable housing. If you’re with us, text HOME to 25859.
