Infrastructure is essential to our daily lives. In principle, excellent infrastructure enables our communities to thrive. For example, parents can make their kid’s soccer game or get home in time for dinner rather than sitting in traffic for hours. Everyone has safe drinking water and breathes clean air. Cities and towns invest in parks, modern school buildings, and streets that support local jobs and attract businesses and families. State-of-the-art airports, public transit, highways, waterways, and railways enable people to travel safely and goods to get to market. And high-speed Internet supports new industries and connects friends and family across the world.
Yet over the last four years, politicians in Washington have failed to deliver for the American people. The current administration has been incapable of keeping its promise to pass major infrastructure legislation, and critical projects around the country are stalled because of it. Meanwhile, our roads and bridges crumble, our schools fall into disrepair, water systems poison our children, and our flood protection systems fail as climate change accelerates. When our infrastructure works well, we hardly notice. These days, we notice our infrastructure a lot.
In communities across America, we know that investments in infrastructure create well-paying jobs and provide essential services like water and transportation that help us raise families and start businesses. This is why cities and towns have been leading the way on new infrastructure partnerships and approaches. Yet too often, as I saw in South Bend, the federal government does not help as it should—by failing to fund and prioritize infrastructure or by relying on outdated standards.
Under my administration, local governments will finally have a partner in Washington. As a former mayor, I know that priority-based budgets made locally are better than budget-based priorities set in Washington. That’s why we will ensure that federal funds go to the cities, counties, tribes, towns, and states that need more resources to create good jobs and combat climate change through smart infrastructure investments.
My infrastructure plan achieves three things: opportunity, equity, and empowerment. First, we will create opportunities for individuals and communities, including millions of well-paying union jobs. Second, we will close disparities and ensure that everyone has access to adequate infrastructure like clean drinking water and affordable ways to get to work. Finally, we will empower local communities to lead on infrastructure development so that they can support safe, vibrant, growing neighborhoods.
My administration will invest over $1 trillion in working with states, cities, and other local governments to build the sustainable infrastructure of the 21st century. We will achieve measurable outcomes for opportunity, equity, and empowerment:
Create six million well-paying jobs with strong labor protections, especially in underrepresented communities.
Ensure that every American has access to clean drinking water.
Lower water bills nationwide, slashing the average bill by 50 percent–the equivalent of over $600–for 10 million families.
Protect millions of families from lead in paint and water through a $100 billion investment.
Update and fix the majority of our roads and bridges in poor condition by 2030.
Invest in sustainable infrastructure that enables 50 percent of U.S. counties to grow over the next 10 years, as measured by an increase in jobs, businesses, or population.
Read Petes plan to build sustainable, 21st century infrastructure.
Key policies include:
Jobs
Create six million well-paying jobs with strong labor protections. For every infrastructure project that his administration funds, Pete will protect and support the Davis-Bacon Act to ensure that workers are paid fair wages and that taxpayers receive the best value for their money.
Commit $10 billion to attracting and training a skilled infrastructure workforce, including by supporting pre-apprenticeship programs that collaborate with Registered Apprenticeships. He will also establish a National Infrastructure Accelerator and offer $100 million in grants to support initiatives that introduce K-12 students to infrastructure and clean energy jobs.
Dramatically expand access to infrastructure jobs for underrepresented communities. Pete will commit $100 million to expanding Apprenticeship Readiness Programs that help job seekers from underrepresented communities enter apprenticeships and careers.
Create a $200 billion transition fund for workers in a clean energy economy. Pete’s transition fund will support programs to align mining and fossil fuel workers with new well-paying jobs with strong labor protections in clean energy and sustainable infrastructure.
Clean Water
Ensure lead-free water by investing $20 billion in replacing three million lead service lines by 2030 and supporting best-in-class corrosion control. As a Midwestern mayor of an industrial city, Pete understands the severity of this threat and knows that addressing these problems is not easy. That is why Pete will provide the resources to tackle this crisis by establishing a $100 billion Lead-Safe Communities Fund to address lead in water, paint, and soil.
Prevent and address PFAS contamination by establishing science-based standards that limit the amount of PFAS in drinking water and developing safe alternatives to PFAS in commercial use.
Lower water bills by an average of 50 percent–the equivalent of over $600–for 10 million families through a Drinking Water Assistance Matching Fund. Water and wastewater services are unaffordable for nearly 14 million households, and this number could triple within five years. The Fund will provide a 1:3 federal funding match for states and local water systems that assist low-income families with water bill payments.
Invest over $30 billion in water and wastewater infrastructure to expand access to basic services, upgrade existing systems, and drive innovative approaches.
Public Transportation
Invest $150 billion to support cities and towns in providing equitable public transportation, including improved options for subway, light rail, bus rapid transit, and last mile service.
Expand accessible rural public transportation with a $12 billion investment.
Improve the connectivity and safety of our national rail network.
Stalled Infrastructure Projects in Iowa
Public transit: The Des Moines Area Regional Transit Authority recently received $17.3 million in federal funding to relocate its maintenance garage, which is undersized and prone to flooding.Cannon, Austin. “DART Awarded $17 Million Federal Grant to Move Operations Center.” Des Moines Register. November 25, 2019. Yet the project, expected to cost $68 million, remains in the early stages of planning.Key policy: Pete will invest $100 billion in equitable public transportation, so that transit systems like Des Moines can upgrade their facilities.
School repair needs: Iowa schools often struggle with the costs of repairing crumbling infrastructure. The Clear Creek Amana School District has taken on $35,000 of debt per student to cover the costs of rising enrollment and repairs for aging buildings.Wade, Lauren. “Growing Iowa School Districts Turn To Debt To Meet Demands, But So Do Non-Growing Districts.” Iowa Public Radio, April 22, 2019Key policy: Pete will create an $80 billion school repair program to support schools in renovating their buildings to better serve students.
Lead contamination: In 2016, tests in the Kalona Water Department found levels of lead that were three times higher than the threshold that the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) considers safe. Several other cities also reported lead levels above the EPA threshold. Yet as of 2016, only one city in Iowa—Story City—has performed a thorough lead service line replacement.Elmer, MacKenzie. “Thousands of Iowans Drinking Water Threatened by Lead Contamination.” Des Moines Register. December 20, 2016.Key policy: Pete will invest $100 billion in a Lead Hazard Mitigation Fund for lead paint remediation and lead pipe replacement.
Transportation: New Options for Communities
Ensure that federal transportation projects improve access to opportunity by determining how effectively they connect people to jobs and services.
Double the BUILD program and create a Local Leaders Office at the Department of Transportation (DOT) to help local communities more easily access federal funds and expertise.
Create a new $3 billion grant program for programs of national significance to facilitate collaboration across states and regions.
Stalled Infrastructure Projects in New Hampshire
Public transit: The New Hampshire Department of Transportation (DOT) is planning to build a commuter rail line, which will connect Nashua, Manchester, and Boston. The DOT plans for this project to add thousands of jobs and attract new businesses.Haime, Jordyn. “N.H. Capitol Rail Project Advances to Next Stage.” New Hampshire Public Radio, July 22, 2019.Key policy: Pete will invest $100 billion in equitable public transportation, including intercity rail, to support these types of projects.
PFAS contamination: New Hampshire suffers from some of the worst PFAS contamination in the country, including at the former Pease Air Force Base and the Saint Gobain plastics facility in Merrimack.Crompton, Jennifer. “Study on Effects of PFAS Contamination Set to Launch at Pease.” WMUR. October 11, 2019. Houghton, Kimberly. “Nearly 1,000 More Wells Must Be Tested for PFOA in Merrimack.” New Hampshire Union Leader. November 7, 2019.Key policy: Pete will establish science-based standards to limit PFAS levels in water. He will triple EPA’s budget for environmental cleanup funds to help remediate PFAS in polluted sites.
Schools repair needs: There is an ongoing moratorium on school building aid in New Hampshire. The New Hampshire Department of Education estimates that ~$650 million is needed to fund construction or renovation projects for schools.“While the Building Aid Program Is in Moratorium, Schools Have to Find Alternative Ways to Make Their Spaces Work.” Reaching Higher NH, February 18, 2019.Key policy: Pete will create an $80 billion school repair program, so schools can fund critical repairs and new construction projects to meet evolving student needs.
Read Petes plan to invest in safe, equitable public transportation.
Roads & Bridges
Provide dedicated funding to repair half of roads in poor condition and structurally deficient bridges by 2030. Pete’s DOT will strengthen State of Good Repair Performance Management requirements and require states to develop achievable plans for maintaining their roads before they use federal funds for new roads or expansions. He will also create a $50 billion grant program for states to repair bridges.
Power millions of new electric vehicles (EVs) by investing $6 billion in new charging infrastructure. Investing in EVs is a tool both to combat climate change and to drive manufacturing job growth. Pete will provide $6 billion in grants and loans through the American Clean Energy Bank for states and cities to partner with private companies and unions on installing publicly available charging infrastructure powered by clean energy. At least 40 percent of the funds will be available for projects in multi-unit dwellings and economically disadvantaged communities.
Make the Highway Trust Fund solvent. The Highway Trust Fund has been insolvent since 2008, causing uncertainty about whether states can complete critical projects. Pete will inject $165 billion into the Fund to ensure that it remains solvent through 2029.
Road Safety
Build safer roads for all, including by doubling funding for the Transportation Alternatives Program to install more accessible sidewalks, crosswalks, and bike lanes. Pete will provide incentives for states, cities, and counties to build safe, accessible roads and retrofit existing unsafe roads. His DOT will work with tribal communities to ensure that roads in Indian Country are safe for families.
Increase funding in the Highway Safety Improvement Program for building safer rural roads. Pete’s DOT will also fund studies to improve road safety on rural roads, which account for 50 percent of traffic fatalities and are over twice as deadly as urban roads.
Connect funding to safety performance by requiring state transportation agencies to set targets that reduce fatalities and injuries and are consistent with a national Vision Zero goal. Pete’s administration will require states to actively improve their safety records or road design processes, or else lose federal funding for other roadway projects.
Incentivize safe driving practices. Pete will increase federal funding to $1 billion a year for the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) and Federal Highway Administration to address unsafe driving behavior, research solutions for distracted driving, and strengthen enforcement.
Air & Shipping
Repair and modernize inland waterways through a $5 billion investment.
Invest in cleaner and more efficient ports.
Make our aviation system safer and more accessible for small communities.
Community Empowerment
Protect millions of families from lead poisoning by investing $80 billion in lead-based paint remediation and ensuring that the EPA fully enforces the Renovation, Repair, and Painting Rule.
Double funding for Community Development Block Grants.
Create good infrastructure jobs in local communities, including by extending the DOT’s Local Labor Hiring Preference Pilot and promoting Community Benefit Agreements.
Repair school infrastructure. America’s $46 billion annual funding gap for repairing school buildings harms many students, including students in communities of color who suffer from poor heating and mold in classrooms. Petes administration will provide schools with $80 billion in grants and loans to repair classrooms and facilities.
Offer cities and states $3 billion to launch programs that lower infrastructure costs for low-income families.
Mitigate past injustices in transportation planning. Pete will use innovative solutions like complete urban streets to mitigate the negative effects of highway expansion projects on Black and Latino neighborhoods.
Read Petes plan to invest in infrastructure that helps communities grow and thrive.
Broadband
Ensure full high-speed broadband coverage with an $80 billion Internet For All initiative.
Ensure that students can use the Internet to learn and succeed.
Make broadband more affordable, especially for low-income families.
Stalled Infrastructure Projects in South Carolina
Flooding prevention and mitigation: The City of Charleston is seeking funding for multiple flood prevention and mitigation projects, including the Spring-Fishburne drainage project and Low Battery seawall. Spring-Fishburne will cost significantly more than its initial $154 million budget and Low Battery will cost around $64 million.Porter, Mikaela. “Charleston Agrees to Seek $32 Million for Low Battery Project.” The Post and Courier, November 19, 2019.Key policy: Pete will establish a new $50 billion Community Flood Protection to help states repair dams and levees and develop natural infrastructure solutions.
Bridges: A bridge on state road 20 in Greenville County has been shut for repairs since late 2018. It was supposed to be finished in March 2019, but the new target completion date is now April 2020.LaFleur, Elizabeth. “Ask LaFleur: Why Isnt the SC 20 Bridge Project in Greenville County Finished?” The Greenville News. May 3, 2019.Key policy: Pete’s plan will create a $50 billion bridge repair program to ensure that critical and delayed bridge repairs have the resources they need.
Small water systems: The South Carolina Department of Health and Environmental Control has investigated over 150 small drinking water systems in the past 25 years for water quality issues. Fretwell, Sammy. “Tainted Drinking Water in Rural Communities Draws Attention of DHEC Chief, Lawmakers.” The State, March 28, 2019.Key policy: Pete’s plan will invest $30 billion in water infrastructure to fund upgrades for outdated infrastructure and water cleanup. This will include $5 billion in grants to help small water utilities improve their operations.
Climate & Resilience
Repair and modernize flood protection systems in every community that needs it by 2030.
Prepare for rising seas with a $40 billion Sea Level Defense Fund.
Empower communities to develop tailored solutions for resilience through Cooperative Extensions for Climate and Flood Resilience.
Increase reliable water supply to mitigate the effects of drought.
Expand pre-disaster mitigation programs for inland and coastal areas.
Create a U.S. Infrastructure Cyber-Protection Taskforce to protect against digital threats.
Build a more resilient electric grid by improving risk management and emergency response.
Protect against wildfires, including by recruiting 5,000 firefighters and fire management experts.
Stalled Infrastructure Projects in Nevada
Roads and bridges: Nevada faces a $450 million backlog of road and bridge repairs. The need for repairs is especially severe in Nevada’s 15 rural counties. Bad roads cost Nevada drivers $3.2 billion annually.“Nevada 2018 Infrastructure Report Card.” American Society of Civil Engineers. 2018.Key policy: Pete’s plan will ensure that 50% of critical road repairs occur by 2030. He will create a $50 billion bridge repair program with dedicated funding available for rural areas.
Water infrastructure: The EPA estimates that Nevada will need over $5.3 billion in investment over the next 20 years to meet the state’s clean water needs. Las Vegas and Reno will require additional resources to accommodate their rapidly growing populations, and Nevada’s rural areas have historically lacked resources and funding to meet their water needs.“Nevada 2018 Infrastructure Report Card.” American Society of Civil Engineers. 2018.Key policy: Pete will invest over $30 billion in water infrastructure. This is a massive expansion of resources for upgrading existing water infrastructure and finding innovative approaches to improve wastewater services.
School repair needs: Nevada’s rural school districts suffer from chronic underfunding. For example, two of the ten school buildings in White Pine County are over a century old. “Nevada 2018 Infrastructure Report Card.” American Society of Civil Engineers. 2018.Key policy: Pete will create an $80 billion school repair program, so that schools can update and renovate their buildings and create high-quality learning environments for students.
Innovation
Develop smart and integrated infrastructure by establishing a Digital Infrastructure Council and tasking every infrastructure agency with creating a digital infrastructure strategy.
Lead the world in safe and zero-emissions autonomous vehicle technology.
Create the Advanced Research Projects Agency-Infrastructure to research innovative infrastructure technologies and solutions.
Stalled Infrastructure Projects in California
Public transit: The Bay Area Rapid Transit System applied for federal funding to expand its capacity in August 2015. In May 2019, it called on the federal government to release $1.25 billion of money from the Capital Investment Grant Program. The project was delayed by Trump’s Department of Transportation for over a year. Wanek-Libman, Mischa. “BARTs Crunican: We Cant Wait Any Longer, Our System Is Already at Capacity.” Mass Transit, June 4, 2019.Key policy: Pete will double the size of the Capital Investment Grant program and streamline project processing to ensure that projects get federal support faster.
Lead in homes: About 2,000 children are diagnosed with unsafe levels of lead in their blood each year in Los Angeles County, likely due to old homes that have not been renovated. Karlamangla, Soumya. “Lead paint, banned for decades, still makes thousands of L.A. County kids sick,” Los Angeles Times. December 30, 2019.Key policy: Pete will invest $80 billion in lead remediation for paint, windows, and soil in homes. He will enforce the Lead Repair, Replacement, and Painting rule to ensure that any renovations are done using lead-safe procedures.
Read Petes plan to invest in innovative, climate-smart technologies and solutions.
Footnotes
It's up to you!
Pete doesn't take any money from federal lobbyists, corporate PACs, or the fossil fuel industry. Please chip in whatever you can to help build our grassroots movement.   $5
$10
$20.20
$50
$100
Other
If you've saved your information with ActBlue Express, your donation will go through immediately. Contributions or gifts to ActBlue are not deductible as charitable contributions for Federal income tax purposes.
Home
Issues
Meet Pete
Ask Pete
Rules of the Road
Events
Store
Donate
Jobs
Contact Us
Tax Returns
Accessibility
Terms of Service
Privacy Policy
Mayor Pete Buttigieg is a former member of the Navy Reserve. Use of Mayor Buttigieg’s military rank, job titles, and photographs in uniform does not imply endorsement by the Department of the Navy or the Department of Defense.
Paid For By Pete For America
Home
Infrastructure
Immigration
Agenda for Latinos
K-12  Early  Education
Health Equity  Justice
Retirement  Long-Term Care
Education  Workforce Development
Veterans  Military Community
Working Families
Disability and Inclusion
Criminal Justice Reform
Agenda for Women
Indian Country
LGBTQ+
A New Era for Health
Disaster Preparedness
Climate Change
Unleash Rural Opportunity
Preventing Gun Violence
Empower Workers
The Douglass Plan
A New Call to Service
More Issues...
Meet Pete
Take Action
Ask Pete
Events
Supporter Toolkit
Store
Donate
En Español
Support Pete's Campaign
Pete doesn't take any money from federal lobbyists, corporate PACs, or the fossil fuel industry. Please chip in whatever you can to help build our grassroots movement.
$5
$10
$20.20
$50
$100
Other
If you've saved your information with ActBlue Express, your donation will go through immediately.
Learn how Pete's plans will improve your every day life
Keep up with events, merch releases, and other campaign updates
Find out how you can get involved and join #TeamPete
Support our bold vision for the future
Pete doesn't take any money from federal lobbyists, corporate PACs, or the fossil fuel industry. Please chip in whatever you can to help build our grassroots movement.
$5
$20.20
$50
$100
$1000
Other
If you've saved your information with ActBlue Express, your donation will go through immediately.
