$10
$100
$1000
$20.20
$25
$5
$50
A New Call to Service
A New Era for Health
ASK PETE                       Use Our Video Search Tool To Hear From Pete, In His Own Voice, Where He Stands On The Issues
Accessibility
An Action Plan to Combat the National Threat Posed by Hate and the Gun Lobby
Ask Pete
Back to The Record Index
By submitting your cell phone number you are agreeing to receive periodic text messages from Pete for America. Message and data rates may apply. Text HELP for more information. Text STOP to stop receiving messages.
Contact Us
Design Toolkit
Donate
Education  Workforce Development
En Español
Events
Find an Event
Footnotes
Get Involved
Health Equity  Justice
Higher Ed  Workforce Development
Home
If you've saved your information with ActBlue Express, your donation will go through immediately.
If you've saved your information with ActBlue Express, your donation will go through immediately. Contributions or gifts to ActBlue are not deductible as charitable contributions for Federal income tax purposes.
Indian Country
Issues
It's up to you!
Jobs
K-12  Early  Education
Key Policy
Mayor Pete Buttigieg is a former member of the Navy Reserve. Use of Mayor Buttigieg’s military rank, job titles, and photographs in uniform does not imply endorsement by the Department of the Navy or the Department of Defense.
Meet Pete
More Issues...
Other
Other Critical Policy Areas
Paid For By Pete For America
Pete doesn't take any money from federal lobbyists, corporate PACs, or the fossil fuel industry. Please chip in whatever you can to help build our grassroots movement.
Pete doesn't take any money from federal lobbyists, corporate PACs, or the fossil fuel industry. Please chip in whatever you can to help build our grassroots movement.   $5
Pete doesnt take any money from federal lobbyists, corporate PACs, or the fossil fuel industry. Please chip in whatever you can to help build our grassroots movement.
Pete’s Commitment to Transparency
Pete’s getting ready for New Hampshire! Take our important pre-primary survey.
Preventing Gun Violence
Privacy Policy
READ MORE
READ THE PLAN
Read More
Read the Plan
Read the plan
Retirement  Long-Term Care
Rules of the Road
See More Plans...
Share
Shop the Store
Store
Support Pete's Campaign
Support our campaign as we continue to make history.
Supporter Toolkit
Take Action
Tax Returns
Terms of Service
The Record
Veterans  Military Community
– Frederick Douglass
Black and brown Americans are disproportionately impacted by our broken criminal justice system. Read more about Petes plan to combat challenges at this intersection.
Black and brown Americans are disproportionately impacted by our broken mental health care and criminal justice systems. Read more about Petes plan to combat challenges at this intersections.
LGBTQ+ people, particularly trans women of color, face significant discrimination. Read more about Petes plan to combat challenges at this intersection.
Read More
READ MORE
Read more about how Pete will rebalance the economy so it works for all Americans
Read more about Petes plan to lift rural communities.
Read more about Pete’s plan to protect and support workers.
Read more about Pete’s plan to put college within reach for more Americans.
Read more about Petes plan to put patients first.
Read more about the Douglass Plan here.
Click here to see why Medicare for All Who Want It is the best solution for Americans.
Read Petes full plan to ensure affordability and choice in our health care system.
Download Pete’s full plan to improve healing and belonging in our communities.
Read Pete’s plan to comprehensively address gun violence.
Read Pete’s plan to protect renters.
Read Pete’s plan to provide housing justice for all Americans.
Read Pete’s plan to increase access to affordable housing.
This is the moment. Can you make a donation right now to help power the campaign that will beat Donald Trump?
Campaign Update
We need to raise
$13 Million
by Super Tuesday
March 3rd,                         2020
in order to stay competitive.
Can you                             chip                             in right now?
$13 Million
If you've saved your information with ActBlue Express, your donation will go through                             immediately.
Campaign Update
We need to raise
$13 Million
by Super Tuesday
March 3rd,                         2020
in order to stay competitive.
Can you                             chip                             in right now?
$13 Million
If you've saved your information with ActBlue Express, your donation will go through                             immediately.
If you've saved your information with ActBlue Express, your donation will go through                             immediately. Contributions or gifts to ActBlue are not deductible as charitable contributions for Federal income tax purposes.
Read Pete’s plan to increase access to education for AAPI families.
Read Pete’s plan to economically empower AAPI communities.
Read Pete’s plan to improve health access and outcomes for AAPI communities.
Read Pete’s plan to reduce the burden placed on AAPI families by our immigration system.
Read Pete’s plan to ensure that AAPI families feel safe and secure in the United States.
Black Americans are disproportionately impacted by our broken public systems. Read Petes plan to combat community-specific challenges.
Black and brown Americans are disproportionately impacted by our broken mental health care and criminal justice systems. Read more about Petes plan to combat challenges at this intersections.
Pete understands that we must begin to take mental health more seriously. Read his plan to promote healing and belonging in America.
Read More
Read more about Petes plan to lift rural communities.
Read more about Petes plan to put patients first.
Read Pete full plan to ensure safety for all LGBTQ+ people.
Read Pete’s bold solutions for gun violence prevention.
Read Pete’s full plan for antitrust enforcement.
Read Pete’s full plan for community-driven mental health care.
Read Pete’s full plan for unleashing the potential of rural America.
Read Pete’s full plan to connect rural Americans with the information they need to thrive.
Read Pete’s full plan to empower rural communities to combat climate change.
Read Petes full plan to end the HIV/AIDS epidemic by 2030.
Read Petes full plan to ensure our communities are resilient to climate change.
Read Pete’s full plan to ensure our system is people—not profit—focused.
Read Pete’s full plan to ensure safer medicines for all.
Read Pete’s full plan to give all Americans equal access to mental health care.
Read Pete’s full plan to guarantee access to quality, affordable health care.
Read Pete’s full plan to guarantee LGBTQ+ people full equality under the law.
Read Pete’s full plan to help seniors and people with low incomes.
Read Pete’s full plan to help those hit hardest by rising health care costs.
Read Pete’s full plan to holistically lift the community—from protecting youth and families to honoring LGBTQ+ culture.
Read Pete’s full plan to improve mental health and combat addiction.
Read Pete’s full plan to lower costs for millions of Americans.
Read Petes full plan to meet the climate challenge.
Read Pete’s full plan to secure a healthy future for rural America.
Read Petes full plan to strengthen American leadership.
Read Petes full plan to support policies that reflect our American values of diversity and inclusion of all people.
Read Pete’s full plan to take on pharmaceutical companies.
Read Pete’s full plan to unleash the potential of rural America.
Read Pete’s plan ensure women receive equal pay for their work.
Read Petes plans to reform our health care system.
Read Pete’s plan to apply a health equity lens across the federal government.
Read Pete’s plan to bolster economic development in Indian Country.
Read Pete’s plan to build a 21st-century workforce.
Read Pete’s plan to build an economy that delivers more—for all Americans.
Read Pete’s plan to build a society that welcomes and values people with disabilities.
Read Pete’s plan to build greater access, equity, and affordability into our early child care system.
Read Pete’s plan to build more accessible transportation systems.
Read Petes plan to build sustainable, 21st century infrastructure.
Read Petes plan to build womens power in our economy, our political system, and our society.
Read Pete’s plan to catalyze climate-smart job creation for American workers.
Read Pete’s plan to create an era of inclusion in health.
Read Pete’s plan to create new standards for responsible gun ownership.
Read Pete’s plan to disarm hate, abuse, and terror.
Read Petes plan to empower and protect workers.
Read Pete’s plan to end voter suppression and expand voting access for Latinos.
Read Pete’s plan to ensure all Americans experience dignity and security in retirement.
Read Pete’s plan to ensure all students—including students with disabilities—have equitable access to high-quality education.
Read Pete’s plan to ensure equitable, high-quality education for all students.
Read Pete’s plan to ensure financial security for aging Americans.
Read Pete’s plan to ensure incarcerated people are provided full support and equal rights
Read Pete’s plan to ensure Latino history and culture is celebrated.
Read Pete’s plan to ensure opportunity is within reach for all Americans.
Read Pete’s plan to ensure our criminal legal system is led by people committed to justice
Read Pete’s plan to ensure safety and security for all women.
Read Pete’s plan to ensure the military is an inclusive institution.
Read Pete’s plan to fight for women’s safety at work.
Read Pete’s plan to fully support direct care workers and unpaid family caregivers.
Read Pete’s plan to give every child access to after-school and summer programs.
Read Pete’s plan to grow workers’ incomes.
Read Pete’s plan to help our veterans thrive after service.
Read Pete’s plan to improve health outcomes in Native communities.
Read Pete’s plan to improve the quality of life for people in long-term care.
Read Pete’s plan to incentivize health systems to prioritize health equity.
Read Pete’s plan to invest in high-quality, affordable college education.
Read Petes plan to invest in infrastructure that helps communities grow and thrive.
Read Petes plan to invest in innovative, climate-smart technologies and solutions.
Read Petes plan to invest in safe, equitable public transportation.
Read Petes plan to invest in the empowerment of Black America
Read Pete’s plan to keep America’s promise to care for our veterans and military community members.
Read Pete’s plan to lower costs for working and middle class families.
Read Pete’s plan to make achieving health equity a national imperative.
Read Pete’s plan to make colleges safer and more transparent.
Read Pete’s plan to make it easier for people with disabilities to achieve economic self-sufficiency.
Read Pete’s plan to make our health care system more inclusive for all.
Read Pete’s plan to make sure the VA helps heal the wounds of war.
Read Pete’s plan to make the United States a global leader in advancing the rights of people with disabilities.
Read Pete’s plan to promote women’s leadership and history.
Read Pete’s plan to protect the natural resource rights of Native communities.
Read Petes plan to protect womens access to affordable and comprehensive health care.
Read Pete’s plan to provide access to high-quality, affordable health care.
Read Pete’s plan to provide comprehensive support to Latino families.
Read Pete’s plan to realize a new era for Latinos.
Read Pete’s plan to reduce the burden of student loans.
Read Pete’s plan to reform our criminal legal system
Read Petes plan to reform policing
Read Pete’s plan to regulate the gun lobby, weapons of war, and new technologies.
Read Pete’s plan to reset the federal government’s relationship and re-engage in active diplomacy with Tribal Nations.
Read Petes plan to rise to the climate challenge.
Read Pete’s plan to shift the balance of power back to workers.
Read Pete’s plan to strengthen America’s public schools.
Read Pete’s plan to systematically build up the power of women in our economy, political system, and every part of society.
Read Pete’s plan to train our health care workforce to combat racism.
Read Pete’s plan to use the federal government to promote justice
Read Pete’s proposal for national service: “A New Call to Service.”
Read the article
Read the Douglass Plan: A Comprehensive Investment in the Empowerment of Black America
Watch  Read
“When gun violence strikes our communities, or natural disasters devastated our neighborhoods, Pete has been there, helping to hold our community together.” Read more.
Read Pete’s agenda for Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders.
If you agree with Pete's stance on Affordable Housing
If you agree with Pete's stance on A New Era for Latinos
If you agree with Pete's stance on Child Care  Early Education
If you agree with Pete's stance on Climate Change
If you agree with Pete's stance on Consumer Protections
If you agree with Pete's stance on Criminal Justice Reform
If you agree with Pete's stance on Disability
If you agree with Pete's stance on Election Security
If you agree with Pete's stance on Electoral College Reform
If you agree with Pete's stance on Extremism
If you agree with Pete's stance on Foreign Policy
If you agree with Pete's stance on Gender Equity
If you agree with Pete's stance on Gerrymandering
If you agree with Pete's stance on Gun Laws
If you agree with Pete's stance on Health Care
If you agree with Pete's stance on Higher Education
If you agree with Pete's stance on Immigration
If you agree with Pete's stance on Inclusive Economic Growth
If you agree with Pete's stance on Indian Country
If you agree with Pete's stance on Infrastructure
If you agree with Pete's stance on Judicial System Reform
If you agree with Pete's stance on K-12 education
If you agree with Pete's stance on LGBTQ Rights
If you agree with Pete's stance on Long-term care
If you agree with Pete's stance on Mental Health  Addiction Care
If you agree with Pete's stance on Minimum Wage
If you agree with Pete's stance on National Service
If you agree with Pete's stance on Organized Labor
If you agree with Pete's stance on Paid Family  Medical Leave
If you agree with Pete's stance on Political Representation
If you agree with Pete's stance on Racial Justice
If you agree with Pete's stance on Reproductive Rights
If you agree with Pete's stance on Rural Opportunity
If you agree with Pete's stance on Social Security
If you agree with Pete's stance on Special Interests
If you agree with Pete's stance on Veterans
If you agree with Pete's stance on Voting Rights
See our housing policy one-pager
See our policy one-pager
See our Puerto Rico policy one-pager
See the policy one-pager
