Privacy Policy
Effective Date: September 4, 2019
This Privacy Policy explains how Pete for America, Inc. (“PFA”, “we” or “us”) collects, uses, and discloses information about you when you access or use our websites and mobile sites that link to this Privacy Policy (collectively, the “Site”).
We may change this Privacy Policy from time to time.  If we make changes, we will notify you by revising the date at the top of the policy and, in some cases, we may provide you with additional notice (such as adding a statement to our website homepage or sending you a notification).  We encourage you to review the Privacy Policy whenever you access the Site or otherwise interact with us to stay informed about our information practices and the choices available to you.
CONTENTS
1) Information Collection
Information You Provide to Us.  We collect information you provide directly to us. For example, we collect information when you sign up to join the campaign, receive updates, request information, fill out a form, sign a petition, sign up as a volunteer, sign up for an event or to host an event, join our grassroots investment team, create an account, participate in a contest or promotion, make a donation or purchase, share your story, submit feedback, communicate with us via third party social media sites request support, send us an email, apply for a job, or otherwise communicate with us.
The types of information we may collect include your name, contact information (including email and phone number), payment information, resume and employment information, demographic information, event information, and any other information you choose to provide.  If you participate in our grassroots investment team, we will also collect information that you choose to provide us about your friends and other third parties. We may also collect information as required by the Federal Election Commission. For example, the FEC requires us to collect the name, mailing address, occupation, and employer of all individuals whose donations to PFA exceed $200 per election cycle.
Automatically Collected Information.  When you access our Site, we may automatically collect information about you, including:Log and Usage Information: We collect information related to your access to and use of the Site, including the type of browser you use, app version, access times, pages viewed, your IP address, and the page you visited before navigating to our Site.
Device Information: We collect information about the computer or mobile device you use to access our Site, including as the hardware model, operating system and version, unique device identifiers, and mobile network information).
Transactional Information: If you make a donation or purchase, we may collect information about the transaction, such as donation amount, purchase price, product details, and date and location of the transaction.
Approximate Location Information: We may derive the approximate location of your device, such as from your IP address.
Information Collected by Cookies and Similar Tracking Technologies: We and our service providers use different technologies to collect information, including cookies and web beacons. Cookies are small data files stored on your hard drive or in device memory that help us improve our Site and your experience, see which areas and features of our Site are popular, and count visits. Web beacons (also known as “pixel tags” or “clear GIFs”) are electronic images that may be used in our Site or emails and help deliver cookies, count visits, and understand usage and campaign effectiveness. For more information about cookies and how to disable them, see Your Choices below. 
Information We Collect from Other Sources.  We and our service providers may, on occasion, collect information, such as voter file data, from outside sources and combine it with information we collect from you. In addition, if you sign up for our grassroots investment team or otherwise create or log into your account through a third-party site, we will have access to certain information from that site, in accordance with the policies of such site.
2) Campaign Purposes and Uses of Information
We may use the information we collect to:
Provide, maintain, support, personalize, and improve our Site;
Solicit volunteers, donations and support for PFA and other candidates, issues and organizations we support;
Facilitate grassroots organizing;
Process donations and transactions;
Communicate with you about the campaign or the Site, and respond to your communications and requests;
Monitor and analyze trends, usage, and activities in connection with our Site;
Provide news and information we think will be of interest to you;
Carry out other purposes described to you at the time the information was collected.
3) Sharing of Information
We may share information about you as follows or as otherwise described in this Privacy Policy:
With vendors, service providers, volunteers, event organizers, and consultants who need access to such information to carry out work on our behalf;
With campaigns, candidates, organizations, groups or causes that we believe have similar political viewpoints, principles or objectives or share similar goals and with organizations that facilitate communications and information sharing among such groups;
With other participants in a joint fundraising committee;
To report information to the Federal Election Commission;
In response to a request for information if we believe disclosure is in accordance with, or required by, any applicable law or legal process, including lawful requests by public authorities to meet national security or law enforcement requirements;
When we believe in good faith that we are lawfully authorized or required to do so or that doing so is reasonably necessary or appropriate to comply with the law or legal processes or respond to lawful requests, claims or legal authorities, including responding to lawful subpoenas, warrants, or court orders;
If we believe your actions are inconsistent with the spirit or language of our user agreements or policies, or to protect the rights, property, and safety of PFA, its employees, volunteers, constituents, or others;
In connection with, or during negotiations of, any reorganization, formation of new committee or successor organization, asset sale or transfer, financing or lending transaction or in any other situation where personal information may be disclosed or transferred as one of the assets of PFA;
With your consent or at your direction.
We may also share aggregated or de-identified information that cannot reasonably be used by those third parties to identify you.
If you host an event, certain information about the event, such as event location and the event contact information may be made available to people who sign up for the event and may be publicly displayed in connection with the event.
4) Data Retention
We store the information we collect on you for as long as is necessary for the purpose(s) for which we originally collected it, or for other legitimate campaign purposes.
5) Links to Other Websites
The Site may contain links to other websites, including sites that contain PFA branding but are hosted by a third party.  For example, we may link to third-party sites to facilitate donations or purchases or organize and manage events. Any personal information you provide on such linked pages is provided directly to that third party, and such third party’s use of that information is subject to that third party’s privacy policy, and not this privacy policy. Information obtained by PFA in connection with such linked pages will be treated in accordance with this policy.
6) Social Sharing Features
The Site may offer social sharing features and other integrated tools (such as the Facebook “Like” button) which let you share actions you take on our Site with other media, and vice versa. Your use of such features may enable the sharing of information with your friends or the public, depending your privacy settings for the relevant social media sites. For more information about the purpose and scope of data collection and processing in connection with social sharing features, please visit the privacy policies of the entities that provide these features.
7) Online Petitions
If you sign an online petition, you understand that such petition is public information and that we may make the petition, and your name, city, state, and any comments provided in connection therewith publicly available. In addition, we may provide such petitions or compilations thereof, including your comments, name, city, and state to national, state or local leaders, or to the press.
8) Advertising and Analytics Services Provided by Others
We may allow others to provide analytics services and serve advertisements on our behalf across the web and in mobile applications.  These entities may use cookies, web beacons, device identifiers and other technologies collect information about your use of the Site and other websites and applications, including your IP address, web browser, mobile network information, pages viewed, time spent on pages or in apps, links clicked, and conversion information.  This information may be used by PFA and others to, among other things, analyze and track data, determine the popularity of certain content, deliver advertising and content targeted to your interests on our Site and other websites, and better understand your online activity.
For more information about interest-based ads, or to opt out of having your web browsing information used for behavioral advertising purposes, please visit www.aboutads.info/choices. You can also change your browser settings to block cookies, although doing so may disable some features of our Site. Your device may also include a feature (“Limit Ad Tracking” on iOS or “Opt Out of Interest-Based Ads” or “Opt Out of Ads Personalization” on Android) that allows you to opt out of having certain information collected through apps used for behavioral advertising purposes.
9) Transfer of Information to the United States
PFA is directed to U.S. residents and we process and store information in the United States.  If you are located outside the United States, we and our service providers may transfer your information to, or store or access to your information in, jurisdictions that may not provide equivalent levels of data protection as your home jurisdiction.
10) Your Choices
You may exercise your choices according to the following:
Promotional Communications.  You may opt out of receiving PFA promotional emails or text messages by following the instructions in those emails or text messages.  If you opt out, we may still send you non-promotional emails, such as those about your use of the Site.
Updating Information.  You may update and correct certain information you provide to us by emailing us at [emailprotected]  We may retain certain information as required by law or for legitimate campaign purposes and may retain cached or archived copies of information about you for as long as necessary for our business purposes.
Cookies.  Most web browsers are set to accept cookies by default.  If you prefer, you can usually choose to set your browser to remove or reject browser cookies. To delete or disable flash cookies please visit www.adobe.com/products/flashplayer/security for more information. Please note that if you choose to remove or reject cookies, this could affect the availability and functionality of our Site.
Mobile Push Notifications/Alerts.  You can deactivate promotional and non-promotional push notifications or alerts at any time by changing the notification settings on your mobile device.
11) California Privacy Rights
California law permits residents of California to request certain details about how their information is shared with third parties for direct marketing purposes. If you are a California resident and would like to make such a request, please contact us at [emailprotected]
12) Contact Us
If you have any questions about this Privacy Policy, please contact us at: [emailprotected]
