America’s public lands and waters are among our greatest assets. Our national parks, forests, wildlife refuges, monuments, conservation areas, and public lands power local economies, provide clean air and water, protect our cultural heritage, and help define who we are as a country. As a mayor and as a veteran, Pete deeply appreciates the value of the outdoors to support healthy communities and sustainable economies and to bring us together as Americans in a place of refuge, reflection, and healing.
Public lands and waters also offer a path forward to fight the climate and nature crises that threaten our economy, national security, and natural systems. To ensure health, security, and prosperity for all Americans, we need a new equitable vision for conservation–one that benefits every community.
As President, Pete will work to combat the climate crisis and protect our nation’s land, water, and wildlife for future generations.
His administration will:
Make public lands and waters part of the climate solution.
Pete’s climate plan harnesses the power of cities and towns, local community leaders, and rural America to ensure we are all part of the climate solution. His plan will make the U.S. economy net-zero emissions by no later than 2050 while helping industries that have provided so many families a livelihood to transform into clean energy leaders and provide for generations to come.
As President, Pete will achieve net-zero emissions from public lands by 2030 by transitioning to a clean energy economy and increasing the availability of public lands to absorb and store carbon. As part of his Day 1 efforts, he will ban new fossil fuel leases on federal lands and waters, and curb methane emissions from existing oil and gas operations. His administration will make sure that treasured landscapes are managed as public lands with a focus on conservation, not fossil fuel extraction.
Pete will also expand the development of, and access to, renewable energy. Responsible onshore and offshore renewable energy deployment is a key strategy in tackling the climate crisis and can create jobs while protecting sensitive ecosystems, cultural heritage, and wildlife habitat. Pete’s administration will support and expand ambitious state commitments by establishing bold national renewable energy goals, including doubling the clean electricity generated in the U.S. by 2025 and building a zero-emission clean electricity system by 2035.
Pete will also promote public lands management that prioritizes the health and resilience of America’s forests, wetlands, and natural systems. With additional protection, restoration, and reforestation, public lands can continue to be a critical component of stemming climate change and supporting the outdoor economy.
Set a national goal of protecting and restoring at least 30% of U.S. lands and oceans by 2030.
The United States is losing natural habitat and biodiversity at an alarming clip: a football field worth of natural areas disappears to human development every 30 seconds.Lee-Ashley, Matt. “How Much Nature Should America Keep?” Center for American Progress. August 6, 2019. These steep losses are forcing wildlife to the brink of extinction and are stressing the natural systems that provide clean air and water. To address this biodiversity crisis, scientists recommend that nations protect 30% of lands and ocean areas by 2030. In the United States, however, only about 12% of our lands and 26% of our oceans are protected today.“Open Letter to All Presidential Candidates.” The Wilderness Society. October 11, 2019.
As President, Pete will work to equitably and thoughtfully protect lands and waters. He will:
Ensure consistent and robust conservation funding for federal land management agencies, states, and tribes. Pete will also secure full, permanent funding for the Land and Water Conservation Fund, which has preserved five million acres of land and supported over 41,000 state and local park projects.“Land and Water Conservation Fund.” The Wilderness Society. Secure funding will help us end maintenance backlogs and create good local jobs.
Strengthen protections for existing public lands under threat of development from the oil, gas, and mining industries. These include the Grand Canyon National Park, Arctic National Wildlife Refuge, Tongass National Forest, Boundary Waters Canoe Area Wilderness, Bears Ears National Monument, Grand Staircase-Escalante National Monument, and Chaco Culture National Historical Park.
Refocus the mandate of federal natural resource agencies to make sure our public lands and waters are managed for conservation and to help solve climate change. We will make our public lands part of the solution to our climate crisis, not one of its casualties.
Restore the integrity of bedrock conservation laws, including the National Environmental Policy Act and the Endangered Species Act.
Prioritize environmental justice, equitable access, and diverse representation across America’s public lands. Pete will address the legacies of racism, exclusion, and injustice that have stood in the way of equitable public lands and natural resource policies. He will advance environmental policies that center the lives of communities of color and other underserved populations that have so often been pushed to the sidelines. It is time to ensure that America’s outdoor spaces are welcoming for all and that conservation opportunities meet the needs of our most polluted and park-poor communities. Pete’s administration will also expand federal support to designate new national monuments and memorials that celebrate the history and contributions of women, communities of color, Indian Country, LGBTQ+ individuals, and other underrepresented groups.
Enact locally relevant conservation, access, and environmental justice policy, such as the Recovering America’s Wildlife Act, in partnership with state and local governments.
Work with Tribal governments, through a renewed commitment to honoring our Treaty and Trust responsibilities to Native American Tribes, to ensure their knowledge of the land is integrated into land management practices and their cultural heritage is protected.
Work with ranchers, farmers, and private landowners to conserve working lands. Pete’s administration will increase funding for conservation easements through the Forest Legacy program and restore compensatory mitigation as a primary strategy for enabling infrastructure projects to be completed. His administration will also create systems to compensate farmers, ranchers, and landowners who provide ecosystem services like watershed protection, habitat restoration, and carbon sequestration.
Restore the health of America’s oceans. Pete’s administration will protect America’s coastal communities from offshore drilling, expand protections for marine areas that are vital for healthy and productive ocean ecosystems, accelerate responsibly sited offshore wind development, and support responsible management policies that help rebuild healthy and sustainable fisheries.
Secure a sustainable water future.
Water supply and use have fundamental and wide-ranging impacts on the environment, public health, cultural values, and the economy. But communities across America, particularly across the West, are facing severe water pollution and scarcity challenges. Seven states are highly dependent on the Colorado River for water, but the water demand on the Colorado River seriously outpaces the river’s water supply.Hood, Grace, and Lauren Sommer. “High Demand, Low Supply: Colorado River Water Crisis Hits Across The West.” NPR. December 30, 2016. As President, Pete will ensure that the federal government supports those states in reviewing the guidelines for managing reservoirs on the Colorado River, with a focus on the needs of underserved communities and tribes in addition to states and utilities. The river must be valued for multiple uses, including biodiversity, cultural needs, and recreation while continuing to sustain major agricultural users and cities like Las Vegas, Los Angeles, and Phoenix.
As described in Pete’s infrastructure plan, he will triple the amount of funding for the U.S. Bureau of Reclamation’s WaterSmart program to catalyze innovation in wastewater reuse and water efficiency improvement and establish a Water Reuse Advisory Council. The Council will identify innovative models for water conservation and efficiency, such as the Southern Nevada Water Authority’s successful conservation and infrastructure improvement initiatives, and will help disseminate best practices nationwide.
Pete’s administration will make a $90 billion investment in ensuring that every American has access to clean water. This will include over $35 billion to provide basic water and wastewater services to the two million Americans who lack it, including many tribal communities, and upgrade outdated water infrastructure.“Closing the Water Access Gap in the United States.” Dig Deep and US Water Alliance. November 2019. Pete’s water agenda will also include $20 billion to replace lead pipes and a new program to help low-income families afford their water bill. In addition, he will establish new science-based standards to keep Americans safe from emerging contaminants like PFAS, or per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances, and triple the budget for EPA’s cleanup programs, including Superfund, so that communities have more federal support for environmental remediation and protection.
Prepare for natural disasters, including protecting families, communities, wildlife habitat, and rangelands from catastrophic wildfires.
Pete knows that while we can’t stop all natural disasters from striking, we can control how we prepare for and recover from them. As outlined in his disaster preparedness plan, Pete will dramatically improve coordination between communities and federal agencies by creating a Disaster Commission within the first 100 days of his presidency. He will increase the number of FEMA-qualified disaster workers, upgrade our 911 system, and protect the Disaster Relief Fund. He will also ensure that federally-funded rebuilding programs are climate smart as well as respectful of the values of local communities.
Pete’s trillion-dollar infrastructure plan includes significant investments in wildfire prevention and protection. He will recruit 5,000 firefighters and related experts across federal, state, tribal, and local agencies to keep communities safe and restore funding for the Bureau of Indian Affairs’ Wildland Fire Training program. He will significantly increase wildfire prevention funding to BLM, which manages roughly 20% more land than the U.S. Forest Service yet receives nearly 80% less wildfire-related support.Spillman, Benjamin. “Americas Sagebrush Sea in the West Is Going up in Smoke. Will Anyone Help?” Reno Gazette-Journal. July 1, 2019. His administration will also ensure that all federal land management agencies have sufficient funds to manage and fight wildfires.
Build resilient communities.
Pete will make sure that we prepare all Americans for accelerating climate change—especially those from low-income, Black, Latino, and Native communities that face disproportionate negative impacts from environmental crises. As shared in Pete’s Douglass Plan for Black America and El Pueblo Unido plan for Latinos, his administration will expand enforcement of environmental protections, invest in solutions to environmental threats, and apply an unprecedented environmental justice and health equity lens across federal policies and programs.
As President, Pete will tackle the climate crisis in a way that builds a just culture of resilience. He will fortify our infrastructure and encourage smart adaptations that will save money and lives when catastrophe strikes. For example, Pete is proposing a national network of Regional Resilience Hubs to provide resilience data, tools, and support to diverse communities as well as facilitate planning and coordination across all levels of government. Each hub will have a Board of Advisors made up of local and regional elected leaders, community leaders, and other citizens. Every year, five billion dollars in Build America Grants will help the hubs jumpstart investments in resilience projects. Investing in resilience both helps our communities and makes good economic sense—for every federal dollar we spend on resilience, we can save an average of six dollars in rebuilding costs and spur economic activity in the process.“Natural Hazard Mitigation Saves Study.” National Institute of Building Sciences. January 2018.
Pete will also establish the U.S. Climate Corps to focus on resilience as part of his A New Call To Service plan. The Climate Corps will be funded through an innovative partnership with the private sector and its activities will include resilience upgrades for homes in vulnerable communities, teaching in schools and communities on issues like conservation and sustainability, and data and program analysis for communities on how to access support and technical assistance from public and privately-sponsored programs and grants.
Recognize the right of Tribal Nations to manage their reservation communities and resources.
Climate change disproportionately threatens the ability of Tribal Nations to protect and preserve their land, air, and water for future generations. As outlined in Pete’s plan for Indian Country, he will make sure that Tribal Nations have the right to review, change, approve, or deny any proposed government action that will directly impact their land, rights, or sacred places. He will restore the original boundaries to the Bears Ears National Monument and prevent further energy development and mining on other sacred places. He will sign an Executive Order requiring all federal agencies to consider treaty rights when developing actions that affect access to natural resources. He will also support access to financial and technical resources that help tribes assess the impacts of climate change and develop meaningful adaptation and mitigation plans.
In addition, Pete’s Department of the Interior, Department of Energy, and American Clean Energy Bank will work with tribes to develop sites and provide financing for large-scale and community-based clean energy projects. Such collaboration will ensure that federally-recognized tribes and other Native communities have increased access to these renewable energy projects and can benefit from them.
