Pete’s Plan For Working Families
Pete’s Agenda for Working Families:
Pete recognizes that we need an economy that delivers more for hardworking Americans. Families across the country need to see higher incomes, lower costs, and a brighter future for our children. In the United States, economic gains should be shared by everyone and everyone should have a fair shot at real opportunity.
Get the Facts:
As President, Pete will make the economy work for all Americans. He’ll measure success by whether working and middle class families are getting ahead - not by the size of the stock market or gross domestic product. He will use public enforcement, public investments, and public options to make the economy deliver for all Americans, not just those at the top. Here are the facts about how Pete will rebalance the economy for working families:
As President, Pete will roll back Trump’s tax cuts for the rich and make corporations and the wealthy pay their fair share. 
Pete will expand the Earned Income Tax Credit, which will increase workers’ incomes by an average of $1,000 per year for 35 million American families.
Pete will ensure equal pay for equal work by signing into law the Paycheck Fairness Act.
Pete will pass a $15 minimum wage and ensure all working Americans have access to paid sick leave and 12 weeks paid family and medical leave. 
Pete will invest $50 billion in workforce training and lifelong learning and will invest up to $5 billion over the next decade to create a national network of apprenticeships. 
Pete will invest $430 billion to make housing more affordable for over 7 million families. 
Pete will achieve universal access to affordable child care, and make early learning and care from birth through age five free for lower-income families. 
Pete will make public tuition free for 80% of American families, including all families earning up to $100,000 and many middle-income families with multiple children. He will provide substantial tuition subsidies for students from families earning up to $150,000. 
Pete will lower health care costs and achieve universal access to health care through Medicare for All Who Want It.
As President, Pete will support and strengthen unions, protect workers’ collective bargaining rights, and expand worker protections for gig workers, farm workers and domestic workers.  
Pete will also reinvigorate antitrust enforcement to protect workers and family farmers.
Check out Pete’s Economic Agenda for Working Families here.
Q: What would Pete do to get money out of politics?
As President, Pete will enact critical campaign finance reforms to restore faith in our Democracy, including strengthening the FEC, creating a new small dollar donor matching program, and pushing to overturn Citizens United and Buckley v Valeo, if necessary by constitutional amendment. 
Pete made this commitment because he isn’t a part of broken status quo in Washington. He’s the mayor of a town that has seen corporate greed run roughshod over his community, and is running to change the system and move the center of gravity back to people’s lives.e greed run roughshod over his community, and is running to change the system and move the center of gravity back to people’s lives.
Q: How would Pete hold big pharma and the health insurance industry accountable?
As Mayor, Pete sued opioid manufacturers and distributors for their role in exacerbating the opioid crisis in South Bend -- and he would hold them accountable as President. Pete’s Affordable Medicines plan will crack down on price gouging by imposing fines and taking away patents from the worst offenders. Pete would also lower the costs of prescription drugs and cap out-of-pocket monthly prescription drug costs.
Q: How would Pete strengthen oversight of the tech industry?
As President, Pete will challenge the anti-competitive behavior of some of the biggest tech companies, update anti-trust policies, and pass new laws to protect data privacy. Pete’s Rising Tide agenda would also ensure the economy of the future works for working people by cracking down on misclassification, creating portable benefits, and making it easier for tech and gig workers to unionize. 
Q: Will Pete strengthen oversight of Wall Street as President?
Yes. Pete grew up surrounded by crumbling factories and empty houses in a community that was ravaged by corporate greed. Pete’s running to change the system and move the center of gravity back to people’s lives -- and he has proposed raising taxes on the wealthy, Wall Street executives and a new tax on financial transactions to pay for his progressive agenda.
Q. What will Pete do to support family farmers and address antitrust enforcement?
As president, Pete will double funding for antitrust enforcement and halve the reporting threshold so firms cannot skirt the law and our laws can be properly enforced. He will revive regional/state antitrust enforcement, re-invigorate the Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards Administration (GIPSA), and require the Department of Justice to conduct post-merger reviews on a regular basis, including ensuring that the telecom industry carries out its promises on rural broadband. Additionally, he will empower his Department of Justice to investigate recent mergers in the seed market for anticompetitive behavior.
Q: Does Pete accept money from federal lobbyists?
No. Our campaign does not accept contributions from registered federal lobbyists, corporate PACs or the fossil fuel industry. As President, Pete will champion critical campaign finance reforms to restore faith in our Democracy because dollars should never be allowed to drown out the will of the people.
Climate Change
Douglass Plan for Black America
Economic Agenda for Working Families
Empowering Workers
Health Care
Veterans
