Apple, Google, Facebook, and Amazon, combined, employ around 750,000 individuals. The federal workforce is made up of 2.3 million individuals.
That’s too many.
Federal workers are smart, dedicated, and hardworking, but they shouldn’t be a protected class of worker. Technology is advancing to the point where we should be able to get more done with fewer people, and studies show that fewer federal employees leave their jobs than their private counterparts and enjoy much higher pension benefits. At the same time, the federal workforce is aging and struggles to recruit and retain younger workers. If the top four tech companies can do as much as they do with fewer than 1 million workers, the federal government can find ways to do more with less.
I’ve been an entrepreneur for almost twenty years - I know what small teams can accomplish when they’re scrappy and resourceful. I also know that most organizations over time become bloated and inefficient unless there are requirements otherwise. Most organizations respond to benchmarks and incentives. The federal workforce can and must do more with less. The rest of us are suffering and our government has to become leaner and meaner.  It also has to get younger and smarter.  
Problems to be Solved
The American people are paying for an oversized and inefficient federal workforce.
The federal workforce is aging fast and struggles to recruit and retain young workers.
Guiding Principles:
Efficiency
Goals
Reduce the size of the federal workforce by 15 - 20%
Increase efficiency so as to not lose productivity
Improve the recruitment and retention of younger workers
As President, I will…
Hire a management consulting firm to identify areas of inefficiency in the federal workforce.
Implement new technology to improve government efficiency.
Reduce the size of the federal workforce by 15  20%, working with Congress to change civil service rules to give management greater discretion.
Enhance the recruitment and retention of younger workers by changing hiring guidelines, compensation and reporting structures to be more responsive to millennials.
