There is a nationwide assault on women’s reproductive freedom. State legislatures  many dominated by male politicians  are undertaking a concerted effort to interfere with a woman’s constitutionally-protected right to make her own health care decisions and limit women’s access to quality health care, including contraception and abortion. These increasingly radical and dangerous plans cannot be tolerated and, as president, Beto would leverage all three branches of the federal government to defend a woman’s right to choose, reverse and prevent laws and actions restricting women’s reproductive freedom, and increase funding for contraceptive care.
EXECUTIVE
Put the full force of the Presidency behind defending women’s reproductive rights and expanding women’s access to health care
Appoint an Attorney General who would protect a woman’s constitutional right under Roe v. Wade to access the health care she needs and deserves in any litigation on this issue, including opposing any unconstitutional TRAP laws and attempts to hide behind religious liberty to limit a woman’s health care options.
Reverse the Trump Administration’s “gag rule” banning doctors from telling women how they can safely and legally access abortion.
Put forth a budget that includes increased Title X funding for women’s health and includes no restrictions on the use of federal health care funds for abortions  as is the case right now under the Hyde Amendment. Such restrictions disproportionately affect women of color and women in underserved communities from accessing abortion.
Remove scientifically unsound FDA labeling regulations that impose barriers to the use of medication-based abortions.
JUDICIAL
Protect Roe v. Wade at every level of the federal judiciary
The federal judiciary is a critical line of defense against the spate of radically anti-choice legislation emerging across the country. Beto is committed to appointing judges who respect Roe v. Wade as the settled law of the land and recognize that a woman’s right to make her own decisions about her own body is squarely grounded in the foundational constitutional principles of liberty and privacy.
LEGISLATIVE
Pass federal legislation affirming Roe v. Wade and expanding insurance coverage for women’s health care services
Beto would work with Congress to pass affirmative, statutory rights that prevent states from unduly burdening a woman’s right to choose and veto any federal legislation restricting this right. Legislation to accomplish many of these goals has been introduced in Congress in the form of the Women’s Health Protection Act and the Equal Access to Abortion Coverage in Health Insurance (EACH Woman) Act.
Federal legislation would:
Affirm constitutional right to choose: Affirm a woman’s constitutional right to choose under Roe v. Wade and preempt state and local laws banning abortion prior to viability.
Stop politically-motivated TRAP laws:
Ban regulations that do not contribute to patient safety standards or quality of care, and are instead meant to close clinics;
Prevent states from mandating medical procedures and protocols, such as medically unnecessary waiting periods or ultrasound requirements, designed to prevent women from accessing abortion.
Protect the full spectrum of reproductive health care through insurance coverage: Repeal Hyde Amendment: The Hyde Amendment, which prohibits spending federal funds on abortion services, disproportionately impacts women of color and women in underserved communities. Any woman who gets her care or insurance through the federal government must be covered for all pregnancy-related care, including abortion.
Prohibit abortion restrictions on private insurance: No politician should be able to interfere in the private insurance market to prevent insurance companies from providing abortion coverage.
Create a universal health care system that includes coverage for the full spectrum of reproductive healthcare, including access to contraception and abortion.
Share on Twitter    Share on Facebook
