Infrastructure: Alabama
Climate change and other environmental problems are directly linked to our deteriorating infrastructure. Broken roads and lack of transit keep us stuck in traffic; and our power grid was built for an era of coal and gas instead of the wind and solar we are shifting to. Both coal and gas are primary contributors to the pollution that causes climate change, asthma attacks, and heart conditions. The effects in Alabama are real—
Roads and Bridges
7% of bridges in Alabama are at risk of becoming dangerous. Roads are scheduled to be resurfaced every 114 years instead of every 15 as needed.
Repair 6,000 bridges and 240,000 miles of roads by 2025. Streamline federal rules to speed funding to needed projects, without compromising communities and the environment.
Establish a $1B annual emergency pothole fund to address needed short-term repairs.
Each red dot represents a structurally deficient bridge (Source: Federal Highway Administration: National Bridge Inventory (NBI))
Traffic Congestion
Triple funding for public transit, expand and improve rail and bus service for 50 million Americans.
Air Quality
Nearly 343,000 Alabamans suffered from asthma, exacerbated by pollution, in 2017. The state generates less than 10% of its energy from renewable resources.
Move the country to 100% clean and renewable energy as quickly as possible, with affordable clean energy available to low-income families. Improve gas mileage and pollution standards for cars and trucks, make electric vehicles affordable for all families, set a path to 100% of new cars being electric by 2035, and replace oil and gas burning equipment in buildings with pollution-free alternatives.
Darker gray represents poorer air quality (Source: CDC. National Environmental Public Health Tracking Network)
Extreme Heat
Drought last fall may have contributed to wildfires in Alabama. The threat of drought and the number of days with high wildfire potential are both projected to double in coming decades, and the number of heat wave days projected to increase from 15 to more than 70.
Invest in making American communities more resilient to storms, floods, extreme heat, drought, and other climate impacts, with a focus on vulnerable low-income communities.
Lead a national effort to strengthen resilience and restore forest health to reduce catastrophic wildfires.
Darker red represents more extreme heat days recorded (Source: CDC. National Environmental Public Health Tracking Network)
Broadband
Less than 20% of Alabamans have broadband internet access in the counties with the highest unemployment rates.
Ensure fast and affordable rollout in rural counties, expanding broadband access to 10 million more Americans by 2025 and to all by 2030.
Darker red represents lower access to broadband internet (Source: United States Census)
Water Systems
Alabama’s water systems are deteriorating. Supplying safe drinking water to Alabama communities is crucial and will require $11.2 billion in investment over the next 20 years.
Invest $100 billion over 10 years to ensure clean drinking water for all communities. Mike will deliver $175 million over 5 years for the Water Infrastructure Finance and Innovation Act program to accelerate local investment in water infrastructure.
