The All-In Economy
Mike has a plan to bring better jobs to the people and communities that have been short-changed by President Trump. His All-In Economy agenda  one that works for All People in All Places  puts more Americans to work in better paying, higher-quality jobs, reinvigorates communities through strategic investments and public-private-academic partnerships, and provides education and training to millions of community college students. This includes sending billions of dollars to communities across the nation to help create jobs and grow incomes by investing in research, talent, and infrastructure, and turning communities into engines for tomorrow’s economy.
Mike unveils his All-In Economy initiative in Chicago, Illinois on January 8, 2020.
Mike unveils his All-In Economy initiative in Chicago, Illinois on January 8, 2020.
Mike’s Plan
The key pillars of Mike’s plan include:
Mike’s plan will make education and training a national priority.
Mikes plan will do so by modernizing systems and programs to equip millions of adults with valuable skills for good jobs and careers. This plan will invest in states, community and technical colleges and others to build career-training systems and programs providing skills and credentials employers identify as priorities for hiring for good jobs — and the supports that learners need to participate and get ahead.
Mike’s plan will create the jobs of the future in communities today.
Mike’s plan will send billions of dollars to communities across the nation to help create jobs and grow incomes. By investing in research, talent, and infrastructure, Mike will help position these communities to be the engines for tomorrow’s economy, building on their strengths, legacies, and aspirations. As part of this, Mike will launch a major public research and development initiative in industries like agriculture, manufacturing, and medicine  to create jobs and reward cities with the best plans for inclusive growth. He will also invest in community college partnerships and apprenticeships that connect people with identifiable jobs and career paths.
Mike’s plan will make work pay.
Mike’s plan will enhance the Earned Income Tax Credit, pay it monthly and pay more where it’s most needed. Mike will also increase the minimum wage to $15 an hour, indexed to inflation, ensure affordable child care, paid family leave and the right to sue employers for harassment and discrimination related to characteristics such as race, gender, sexual orientation, veteran status or disability. And, his plan will grant all workers  including gig, contract and franchise employees  the right to organize and bargain collectively.
Mike’s plan will tap into the job-creating energy of entrepreneurs.
Mike will set up “Business Resource Centers” across the country to help entrepreneurs access capital, navigate bureaucracy and take advantage of federal programs. And he will consolidate programs for small business in the Small Business Administration, and increase staffing and funding.
Mike’s plan will connect rural communities.
Mike’s plan will include improving rural America’s connection to growth centers – for example, by investing in rural broadband access. These areas will be provided with technical assistance to help reap benefits from efforts to connect them with educational institutions, entrepreneurial projects and the online information economy.
Download Mike Bloombergs Plan to Create Jobs and Income Growth
Download
Mikes Record
Unique among the candidates, Mike Bloomberg has a proven track record of increasing job opportunities – as a successful entrepreneur, three term mayor of New York City, and philanthropist – and has built on this success to inform his national strategy. He has created hundreds of thousands of jobs, built and supported training programs that benefit workers of all types, and championed workers’ rights and opportunity throughout his career.
In his first term as Mayor, Mike launched the city’s first ever Five Borough Economic Opportunity Plan, which diversified the City’s economy and introduced community-level diversification that made the city’s economy more resilient and led to the creation of nearly half a million new jobs in New York City and the support of more than 10,000 small businesses. He also increased the number of minority- and women-owned businesses that could do business with the New York City government by 450%.
By contrast, President Trump has over-promised and under-delivered on his pledges to create quality jobs, undermining the economic security of working families across the country and leaving American workers unprepared for future employment challenges. His blunders on the global stage, most significantly the poorly managed tariff war with China, has cost American businesses and consumers billions of dollars in the communities that need help most. As president, Mike will work for the communities left behind by Donald Trump and Mike Will Get It Done.
LEARN MORE ABOUT MIKES RECORD
