Career  Technical Education
Too many workers are stuck in low-paying jobs, and too many young people can’t see a way forward in an economy that isn’t working for them. All Americans should have the chance to learn new skills and earn credentials that lead to good-paying jobs. Mike will launch innovative new programs to connect people with the training they need for the jobs of the future.
How Mike Will Get It Done:
Invest in apprenticeship programs
Launch innovative partnerships with colleges
Streamline the federal government’s career and technical training programs
Make career and technical training programs more affordable
Mike’s Plan:
Invest in apprenticeship programs
Mike will incentivize states and educational institutions to develop new “Apprenticeship Degrees” and other industry-recognized credentials for 1 million students each year, giving them the skills and credentials they need for in-demand jobs.
Launch innovative partnerships with colleges
Mike will fund partnerships between employers and community and technical colleges to prepare people for good jobs and connect them to local employment opportunities.
Mike will protect working Americans, making sure employees have the right to organize, and receive the fair wages, paid family leave and retirement benefits they deserve.
Streamline the federal government’s career and technical training programs
Mike will streamline the federal government’s 43 employment and training programs, pool their resources, and focus funding on those that deliver the best results for workers. He will direct his vice president to lead this effort.
Make career and technical training programs more affordable
Mike will make sure people can access unemployment insurance benefits to help pay for career and technical training programs. He also will launch a pilot program to give people federal student aid for eligible short-term certificate programs.
Mike grabs lunch with students during a visit to Queens Vocational & Technical High School.
Mike’s Record:
Mike Bloomberg has a strong record of supporting career and technical education.
As mayor, Mike created innovative new high schools that combine work experience, internships and career credentials with a traditional curriculum. Mike also launched and expanded programs to help young people get internships to learn digital skills and gain work experience.
Since leaving office, Mike has been supporting organizations that help connect high school students with skills and experience. More than 2,000 students around the country have received skills training for high-demand jobs. Mike’s support is projected to help train 20,000 more students by 2022.
