Clean Buildings
As president, Mike will cut carbon pollution economy-wide in the U.S. by 50% by 2030 and put us on the pathway to full decarbonization before mid-century. To get there, Mike will slash greenhouse gas emissions in three sectors: electricity, buildings, and transportation.
In this clean buildings plan, Mike will immediately prioritize a push for cleaner, healthier buildings in his first term, expanding programs to reduce energy costs for low-income households while simultaneously improving health and safety. Mike’s plan specifically prioritizes low-income and middle-class minority communities that have borne disproportionate impacts of air pollution, and communities less likely to have access to affordable, modern housing.
Using the right mix of policies, Mike will dramatically cut pollution from the buildings sector while unlocking a market with hundreds of thousands of American jobs in construction and manufacturing.
At a Glance, Mike’s Clean Buildings Initiatives:
Help homeowners, building owners and tenants replace appliances and upgrade existing buildings
Set zero-carbon high-efficiency standards for new construction
Ramp up energy efficiency programs and shift to efficient pollution-free appliances
Make energy efficiency affordable for everyone
Ensure the federal government leads by example
Drive innovation and follow the data
Make your voice heard in 2020
Sign up to join a coalition of supporters to help Mike defeat Donald Trump and get big things done.
Mike’s plan
Help Homeowners, Building Owners and Tenants Replace Appliances, and Upgrade Existing Buildings to Save Energy and Reduce Building Emissions
Anyone looking to replace an appliance or building equipment such as a furnace or hot water heater would be offered incentives to choose pollution-free, all-electric options, as well as the chance to upgrade their home or building’s entire energy performance at as close to zero up-front cost as possible. To get there, Mike will:
Create a national program for home and building upgrades. This program will work with contractors, manufacturers, construction unions, and retailers to retrofit homes and buildings on a large scale to save energy and reduce pollution, and will include programs designed for rental and multi-unit housing. Include rebates, tax credits, and low-cost financing for both appliances and building renovation, such as insulation and new windows.
Design incentives to specifically work for low-income households, including encouraging Pay as You Save programs at rural electric cooperatives and other utilities.
Develop a new Bucks for Boilers program that encourages people to trade in old-fashioned oil and gas boilers, heaters, and other equipment.
Convene union leaders and the private sector to speed the pace of money-saving building upgrades. Similar to Mike’s work with NYC’s Clean Heat Fund and the NYC Energy Efficiency Corporation, spur investment in building renovations, and augment it with workforce development programs to train electricians and installers.
Expand workforce programs to help building managers identify and implement low-cost ways to save energy, modeled on the 1,000 Green Supers Program started in New York City during Mike’s time as mayor.
About 85% of existing buildings will remain in use through mid-century – thus, making them more efficient is critical to protecting the climate. Mike will:
Help and incentivize cities and states to adopt energy efficiency standards for existing buildings that require owners of large buildings to gradually reduce pollution and improve energy performance.
Mike will help prospective buyers of homes and buildings learn about energy performance and invest in energy-saving measures, and to get there, he will:
Work with Federal Housing Administration (FHA), Fannie Mae, and Freddie Mac to encourage requiring energy audits when houses are being sold.
Have the FHA once again insure homes with PACE loans and work with Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac to encourage similar financing options for other home mortgages, while ensuring consumer protections.
Push forward Senator Michael Bennet’s SAVE Act, which would allow mortgage lenders to account for home energy costs and energy efficiency measures.
Set Zero-Carbon High-Efficiency Standards for New Construction
Mike will work with states and cities to advance efficiency in new buildings, and help them enforce these standards, saving new homeowners and energy users money. He will:
Push for new buildings to achieve zero-carbon and hyper-efficient performance by 2025, to save energy and reduce onsite emissions from new homes and buildings.
Develop aggressive model clean building codes that maximize energy savings, eliminate pollution, use low-carbon materials, and are solar- and EV-charging-ready.
Help states and cities implement and enforce new building codes, including by expanding the Department of Energy’s (DOE) State Energy Program to provide technical and enforcement assistance to states and cities. This includes connecting state and city code improvement and enforcement to federal funding opportunities. Analysis suggests that every dollar spent on energy code enforcement and compliance yields $6 in energy savings.
Ramp up Energy Efficiency Programs and Shift to Efficient Pollution-Free Appliances
Mike is committed to updating standards to conserve energy, eliminate pollution, and save American consumers money. He will: 
Ramp up appliance efficiency standards and health-related pollution restrictions, including by taking carbon pollution into account, to shift to zero-pollution standards for new appliances and equipment as fast as possible, consistent with 2025.
Expand and upgrade Energy Star to focus on shifting to electric appliances, and to educate people about pollution impacts, in addition to energy savings benefits.
Adopt aggressive national energy efficiency targets for utilities and encourage the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) to enact rules that encourage energy efficiency and ensure a fair market for demand response to support grid-interactive buildings.
Set more stringent standards for all fluorinated gases, including refrigerants, and submit the Kigali agreement to the Senate for ratification. Fluorinated gases include substances used in refrigeration that are highly potent greenhouse gases. Despite bipartisan and industry support for the agreement’s ratification by the Senate, which is estimated by industry to create 33,000 U.S. manufacturing jobs, President Trump has refused to submit the treaty to the Senate for ratification.
Download Mike’s Plan to Transition America to 100% Clean Buildings
Download
Make Energy Efficiency Affordable for Everyone
As president, Mike will expand existing federal programs to reduce energy costs for low-income households while simultaneously ensuring health and safety. Mike plans to:
Implement point-of-sale rebates, tax incentives and low-cost financing to catalyze the use of heat pumps and other electrical equipment, with a focus on low-income and middle-class families.
Increase funding for the Weatherization Assistance Program (WAP), the federal lead-hazard reduction programs, and the Low-Income Home Energy Assistance Program (LIHEAP), so that they are fully funded, and ensure that those programs encourage not only energy efficiency but also prioritize health and safety, as well as address accessibility for disabled people.
Coordinate across weatherization programs at DOE, EPA, Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), and in the states to maximize their effectiveness.
As part of his plan to alleviate the shortage of affordable housing, Mike will expand the Low-Income Housing Tax Credit, and increase funding for federal affordable housing programs. This will be matched with financing solutions for energy efficiency and clean energy.
Ensure the Federal Government Leads by Example
Mike will use the federal government’s buildings to pioneer building decarbonization strategies, and lead the way for other building owners to adopt strategies scaled to their unique challenges. He will also address the emissions associated with the extraction, manufacturing, and transportation of materials commonly used in buildings. He will:
Require all federal buildings to achieve high efficiency and zero-carbon standards ahead of the national targets, including requiring all new components to be electric.
Use federal buildings to test new technologies, such as storage and grid interactivity technologies.
Set emissions and energy efficiency standards for buildings that are leased by the federal government, with funding for renovations where necessary.
Reduce the emissions associated with the extraction, manufacturing, and transportation of materials commonly used in buildings by establishing a “Buy Clean” standard for federal procurement, including for materials used in federal buildings, such as concrete, steel, aluminum, shingles, and glass.
Work to support states and cities in adopting similar procurement standards and building codes.
Drive Innovation and Follow the Data
Mike will keep the U.S. at the cutting edge of technology development, including in zero-carbon buildings that protect people’s health. He will:
Invest in research and development (RD) to further improve efficiency and performance and reduce costs for heat pumps, induction stoves, and other high-performance low-emissions building equipment, systems and materials.
Invest in RD to advance technologies that can capture carbon from the atmosphere and transform it into valuable building products such as steel and concrete.
Invest in RD to advance smart grid and distributed energy resource deployment, including demand response, distributed storage, smart appliances, and micro-grids.
Mike will drive expansion of a smart and resilient, distributed energy system. He will:
Provide building owners, utilities, and city and state regulators with the guidance and assistance they need to develop state-of-the art data systems.
Provide federal matching funds to state incentive programs for real time energy management and deployment of a smart grid.
Mike’s Record
Whether through government, business or philanthropic efforts, Mike’s leadership has laid the groundwork for his national plan to make buildings cleaner for all Americans. As leading environmental philanthropist, he:
Created the Bloomberg Philanthropies American Cities Climate Challenge through a $70 million investment to empower 25 of the largest U.S. cities to implement their near-term climate goals, with a focus on clean transportation and buildings. The 25 cities in the Climate Challenge are projected to collectively cut 40 million metric tons of carbon emissions by 2025.
As mayor, Mike drove carbon reductions in the country’s largest city by adopting pioneering policies that made New York City buildings cleaner and more efficient — increasing the energy efficiency of NYC buildings enough to lower emissions 5% while ensuring that this transition was fair and equitable for all New Yorkers. He also:
Enacted the Greener, Greater Buildings Plan with City Council to improve energy efficiency in existing buildings — which led to reductions in energy consumption (6%) and greenhouse gas emissions (8%) for large New York City buildings, and led to similar programs launching in cities across the country.
Launched the New York City Energy Efficiency Corporation (NYCEEC), the first public-private financing entity dedicated solely to energy efficiency and clean energy financing. NYCEEC has financed over $134 million in clean energy projects.
Convened more than 200 experts in the Green Codes Task Force to recommend changes in city construction, building and energy codes to make buildings healthier and more energy efficient. This remains the most comprehensive effort of any U.S. city to green local construction codes and regulations that affect buildings.
Instituted a nationally-recognized green building standard for affordable housing supported by New York City’s Department of Housing Preservation Development (HPD) to ensure that housing integrated efficient and healthy design practices, lowering energy bills for residents.
Adopted the country’s largest energy and water benchmarking requirement for private buildings, covering almost half of the city’s building footprint. Under Mike’s leadership, New York City was the first city in the nation to disclose building energy metrics at this scale.
Analyzed the energy and water use of the city’s largest buildings – creating the largest existing data set for a single jurisdiction and allowing local government to gain an unprecedented understanding of its building stock.
Launched a program that promoted and facilitated “cool roofs” on buildings across the five boroughs. Since launch, program volunteers have coated more than 5.7 million square feet of rooftops white, making New York City’s buildings more efficient and comfortable.
Launched the Carbon Challenge to encourage businesses, universities and other private organizations to cut greenhouse gas emissions, improve air quality and reduce the impact of climate change. Since launch, more than 100 participants have joined the program. Altogether, participants have cut their annual emissions by 580,000 metric tons of carbon and are collectively saving almost $190 million annually in lower energy costs.
Accelerated voluntary conversion of buildings to cleaner heating fuel by offering free resources to building owners through the New York City Clean Heat Fund. This was supported by a $100 million investment resulting from innovative partnerships between leading banks, energy providers and environmental groups.
Supported the 1,000 Green Supers program to train building superintendents to run their buildings more efficiently.
Increased the amount of recycled materials that could be used in concrete.
Set aggressive targets to reduce GHG emissions in City government operations, including buildings, by 30% in 10 years. During his administration, the City completed 174 energy-efficiency retrofits of City-owned buildings, saving $6.4 million in energy costs annually.
The Issue
Reducing pollution from direct use of fossil fuels in buildings—such as burning natural gas, propane, and fuel oil in furnaces and water heaters—is critical to tackling the climate crisis and eliminating harmful building emissions.
About 85% of existing buildings will remain in use through mid-century; making them more efficient is critical to protecting the climate. There is also growing evidence that appliances we use every day in our homes, such as gas stoves, release air pollutants that can cause respiratory illnesses and asthma attacks.
Trump
President Trump, in addition to denying the existence of climate change, has continuously worked to undermine efforts to cut emissions, including delaying energy-efficiency standards for buildings.
The Trump administration recently unveiled significant changes to the National Environmental Policy Act that would make it easier for federal agencies to approve infrastructure projects without considering climate change.
The Rhodium Group estimates that building emissions continued to increase in 2019 — and emissions will stay on the rise if President Trump remains in office and continues to derail and rollback climate-forward policies.
Net-zero buildings are a key component of the Green New Deal, which Trump and his allies have unequivocally denounced.
Eight Trump properties in New York City do not comply with new regulations designed to slash greenhouse gas emissions, and face millions of dollars in fines.
The Trump administration has reversed energy efficient lightbulb standards, a backward step that could cost the average U.S. household more than $100 per year.
The Trump administration has proposed the withdrawal of efficiency standards for residential furnaces and commercial water heaters, standards that could save consumers more than $24 billion by 2050.
Under the Trump administration, the Federal Housing Administration no longer insures mortgages for homes with PACE liens, further eliminating the incentive for consumers to retrofit their homes for energy efficiency.
The Trump administration has refused to allow the Senate to act on the Kigali agreement to phase out super-pollutant HFC refrigerants — making the U.S. the only major industrial country to not ratify the international agreement. If universally adopted, the Kigali agreement could reduce warming by 0.5 degrees Celsius.
