Clean Transportation
Cars, trucks, and buses are the largest source of carbon pollution contributing to climate change, making up 30% of U.S. emissions and causing asthma and other health problems, especially in low-income communities. Mike’s solution replaces polluting cars and trucks with pollution-free vehicles, ensuring that electric vehicles and charging infrastructure are affordable and accessible to all Americans.
How Mike Will Get It Done:
Electrify all new cars by 2035
Make sure electric vehicles are affordable and convenient for all families
Reduce diesel pollution from trucks, buses, and ports
Improve access to public transit and build high-speed rail
Invest in clean transportation RD, including for aviation
Electrify the government fleet
Keep Up With Mike!
Keep Up With Mike!
As president, Mike will cut carbon pollution economy-wide in the U.S. by 50% by 2030 and put us on the pathway to full decarbonization before mid-century. To get there, Mike will slash greenhouse gas emissions in three sectors: electricity, buildings, and transportation.
Our nation’s transportation system keeps too many Americans stuck in traffic and paying too much at the pump. And it’s also our biggest source of greenhouse gases and pollution that causes asthma and other health problems, especially in low-income communities. The Trump administration has only made things worse by weakening requirements that automakers produce higher-mileage, less-polluting cars and trucks. The good news is that there is a clear path to a clean, efficient and healthy transportation system that doesn’t rely on burning fossil fuels.
New and more affordable electric vehicle models, which can be powered by clean and renewable energy (see Mike’s 100% Clean Power Plan for how we get there), are entering the market rapidly. With drastically lower costs for fuel and maintenance, they save families and businesses money, and clear the air of pollution. At the same time, Americans increasingly prefer to live in communities where it’s easier to take transit, bike or walk to get where they’re going.
Mike’s clean transportation plan ensures that low-income communities and communities of color with the worst air pollution see the benefits of a cleaner system. Mike will prioritize underserved communities for transit improvements, develop programs to switch trucks and buses from diesel to electric, and provide financial assistance to encourage trading in older vehicles for electric ones or for transit vouchers.
Mike will not only undo the harms of the Trump administration, but will tighten gas mileage and pollution limits for cars, trucks and buses, and add national zero-emissions vehicle standards to make electric vehicles available in all communities. He will also guarantee access to charging infrastructure and boost investment in transit, including investments to improve accessibility, bicycling and pedestrian infrastructure, and regional rail and bus systems. Mike’s plan will provide a significant boost to job creation. Mike will work to make sure that the jobs created are good jobs that support the right to organize, fair wages, workforce development, and American manufacturing.
These steps will result in more affordable and equitable transit options for Americans, as well as a pollution-free environment and a clean energy future.
Mike’s Clean Transportation Priorities:
Electrify all new cars by 2035 and reduce diesel pollution with electric trucks and buses.
Reduce pollution and congestion by improving access to public transit and building high-speed rail.
Invest in RD to accelerate towards a zero-pollution transportation system.
Lead by example by electrifying the government fleet.
Make your voice heard in 2020
Join Mike on this issue to help defeat Donald Trump and get big things done.
Join Us
Mike’s plan
Electrify All New Cars by 2035 and Reduce Diesel Pollution With Electric Trucks and Buses
Electric vehicles for personal and family use now perform as well or better than gasoline-powered cars and trucks. They save on fuel, and require less maintenance. As more and more models come onto the market each year, prices fall. Cities and school districts are also buying electric buses and trucks, reducing exposure to diesel pollution. Private companies with big delivery fleets are also using electric vehicles. Mike’s plan will make it affordable for families, communities and businesses to choose these cleaner options, prioritizing the low-income communities that face the worst air pollution.
Mike will reduce pollution from passenger cars and trucks, and make electric vehicles affordable and convenient for all families. To get here, he will:
Reinstate the federal gas mileage and pollution standards for passenger cars and trucks, and reaffirm states’ rights to set higher standards.
Work with states, consumer groups and automakers to improve gas mileage and pollution standards, and add a national zero-emissions vehicle standard – so that, by 2035, 100% of new vehicles are pollution-free.
Make electric vehicles affordable for all families by lifting the cap on those eligible for tax credits, and offer rebates for some families.
Launch a national “Clean Cars for All” program that offers bigger rebates to low- and moderate-income families trading in older, dirtier vehicles for electric ones, or provides vouchers for transit, or bikeshare and other mobility programs.
Mike will reduce pollution from trucks, buses and vehicle fleets, especially in low-income communities with the worst air pollution, and save their owners money on fuel. He plans to:
Reinstate gas mileage and pollution standards for medium- and heavy-duty trucks and buses, tightening those standards, and adding a national zero-emissions standard – so that, by 2030, 15% of new trucks and buses are pollution-free.
Extend and improve tax credits for pollution-free trucks and buses.
Reinstate EPA rules to make sure truck engines meet modern pollution standards when they are retrofitted.
Enhance neighborhood- and community-level environmental monitoring to identify, mitigate, and reduce transportation-related pollution in disproportionately-impacted communities.
Create a new Clean Truck Vouchers program that offers incentives to owners of trucks and buses to trade in old dirty vehicles for pollution-free ones.
Expand federal grants for school districts and transit agencies to buy zero-emissions buses.
Launch a new Zero-Emissions Shipping Hubs program in 15 metro areas, prioritizing low-income areas with high levels of air pollution. This program will lead cities and states in working with ports and truck and bus fleets, including delivery trucks, transit and school buses, and sanitation trucks, to install charging along key routes, electrify ports, electrify vehicle fleets, and connect them with electric vehicle and charger manufacturers.
Work with states, cities, ride-share and taxi companies to convert their fleets to electric vehicles as quickly as possible.
Work with state and local leaders on best practices to accelerate government vehicle procurement of electric vehicles.
Mike will also make electric-vehicle chargers convenient and accessible and reduce pollution from transportation fuels. He will:
Build a network of charging stations along the highway system using tax credits and low-cost financing, aiming to place a station every 50 miles, and offer block grants to states and cities to develop urban charging networks. This would include enabling charging at interstate rest areas; offering incentives to install truck charging at truck stops and in rural areas, including on-farm charging, especially in priority freight corridors; and requiring all charging stations to be universally accessible.
Reform the Renewable Fuels Standard to make it a national Low-Carbon Fuels Standard, require reductions in the carbon content, and give credit to both electric charging and biofuels.
Create good jobs that support American manufacturing, the right to organize, fair wages and benefits, including prevailing wage rules, and workforce development.
Reduce Pollution and Congestion by Improving Access to Public Transit and Building High-Speed Rail
We can make it safer and easier to get to school and reduce carbon pollution at the same time by providing better, accessible transportation choices. Buses, light rail and safe routes for biking and walking are smart investments. And American businesses should have more options for moving goods to market – by freight rail or barge – to reduce both pollution and traffic congestion. By investing in American infrastructure, Mike’s plan will provide a major boost in job creation, and makes sure the jobs created are good jobs.
Mike will invest in transit and infrastructure for biking, walking and other mobility options. He will:
Launch a competitive grant program for 10 large and 10 small communities to pilot car-free zones, superblocks and other innovations.
Significantly increase investment in public transit and infrastructure for bikes and pedestrians (and other mobility options), including investments in transit accessibility.
Invest in airport transit connections.
Change federal subsidies to make transit, cycling and other mobility options as appealing as driving.
Mike will give Americans more choices for long-distance travel. To get there, he will:
Plan regional higher-speed rail networks and working with states to jump-start construction, building at least one new high-speed rail corridor by 2025.
Invest in electrifying the existing rail system.
Use low-cost loans to improve and electrify inter-city bus service.
Mike will invest in low- and no-carbon freight shipping:
Develop incentives for rail companies and state and local governments to add capacity, and for manufacturers to ship more freight by rail or barge.
Develop incentives for rail operators to electrify freight rail lines.
Mike will use infrastructure investments to create good jobs that support working families:
Support the right to organize in every sector of the economy and supporting prevailing wage and Buy American policies.
Connect infrastructure and other clean transportation investments to workforce development, including apprenticeship opportunities.
Invest in RD to Move Toward a Zero-Pollution Transportation System
As part of Mike’s plan to quadruple clean energy RD to $250 billion over 10 years, he will:
Increase investment in vehicle battery technologies, and low- and no-carbon technologies for aviation and other transportation modes that are harder to electrify with current technology.
Lead by Example by Electrifying the Government Fleet
As part of Mike’s “Buy Clean” initiative for federal buildings, his administration will:
Require that all new vehicles purchased by the federal government are zero-emissions vehicles, where possible, by the end of his first term.
Direct federal agencies and the General Services Administration to expand access to vehicle charging at federal facilities and to factor in access to transit, bike, and pedestrian infrastructure when siting federal facilities.
Mike’s Record
Whether in government, business or philanthropy, Mike’s leadership has laid the groundwork for his plan to make our transportation sector cleaner and more efficient, affordable, and accessible for all Americans.
As a leading environmental philanthropist, he created the Bloomberg Philanthropies American Cities Climate Challenge, a $70 million investment to empower 25 U.S. cities to carry out their near-term climate goals, with a focus on citywide clean transportation and buildings. The 25 cities are projected to collectively cut 40 million metric tons of carbon emissions by 2025. Cities from San Diego to Minneapolis to Boston are expanding bus and bike lanes, including EVs in their municipal fleets, boosting adoption of public transit, pioneering “mobility hubs” to increase access to low-carbon transit, exploring congestion pricing and more.
As mayor, Mike demonstrated innovative ways to improve public transit, fix crumbling infrastructure and create car-free pedestrian plazas – helping to make New York City’s air the cleanest it has been in 50 years. He also:
Improved Public Transportation
Mike started Select Bus Service, a strategy to bring reliable transit to communities that lacked access to jobs, schools and services. The service was expanded to 17 routes and brought speedier bus service to 600,000 daily passengers – 27% faster than local routes.
Mike pushed for the extension of the 7 subway line – at the time, the first subway extension funded by the city in more than 60 years. The additional stops provide access to the far West Side.
Mike introduced Citi Bike, the city’s first new transportation system in 60 years, and now the nation’s largest and most successful bike share system – with more than 90 million rides in six years.
Mike improved 6,000 miles of roads and brought all of the city’s nearly 800 bridges into a state of good repair, improving the city’s economic potential and decreasing wasteful spending on short-term repairs.
Built a Strong Foundation for the Future
Mike invested $6 billion over six years in bridge, road, lighting and ferry projects.
He also increased paving and pothole repair, bringing more city streets into good condition.
Increased Community Space
Under Mike’s leadership, New York City created 60 car-free pedestrian plazas, including the plaza in Times Square, which has helped increase foot traffic from 350,000 to 466,000 daily and made it one of the world’s most successful retail districts.
The Issue
President Trump’s deregulation has helped boost emissions from transportation by 1%. As the largest source of climate pollution in the U.S., transportation accounts for nearly 30% of all U.S. greenhouse gas emissions.
The transportation sector is also a major contributor to other pollution that harms health.
Even though the Trump administration is trying to weaken national gas mileage and pollution standards, 10 states have set stronger standards and also require that electric vehicles comprise a minimum percentage of new car sales.
In 2018, Americans lost an average of 97 hours due to traffic congestion, costing them nearly $87 billion, an average of $1,348 per driver.
The federal government spends less than $14 billion a year on public transportation, and ridership has dropped in the past few years — to about 9.9 billion trips in 2018.
From 2010 to 2019, while 28,500 miles of new roads were built in the U.S., only 1,200 miles of transit corridors were added.
The U.S. has only 54 miles of high-speed rail, compared with countries such as Spain, Japan and Germany that have more than 3,000 miles.
In 2019, the federal government spent almost $560 billion on procurement – but neglected the opportunity to use its purchasing power to advance climate protection.
Less than one-third of sedans and minivans purchased by federal agencies in fiscal year 2017 were electric or hybrid electric.
Locating new federal buildings near transit hubs could help to reduce transportation-related emissions from the government’s 2 million civilian workers.
Climate scientists say we must achieve deep decarbonization of the U.S. economy by 2030 to avoid the most devastating impacts of the climate crisis. In order to achieve this, decarbonizing transportation must be an urgent priority for the next administration.
Trump
Trump has worked to undermine clean transportation regulations enacted by the Obama administration. His administration has ignored the science and the growing threat of the climate crisis, attacking clean car standards and challenging the states that try to take the lead, with policies including:
Freezing nationwide vehicle fuel efficiency rules, halting the Obama-era policy to increase fuel efficiency standards and calling for no increases from 2021-2026. The EPA used the argument that dirtier cars will be “safer” cars.
Revoking California’s authority to set its own auto emission rules. In its battles with California, the Trump administration revoked the state’s authority to set auto emissions rules that are stricter than federal standards, a move that, if allowed, would bring more pollution and a decline in the U.S. auto industry’s global standing.
Discouraging automakers from increasing the fuel efficiency of their vehicles by lowering the fines for missing the targets. The new rule requires automakers only pay $5.50 for every tenth of a mile per gallon of fuel above federal standards that new cars consume, a drop from the $14 for every tenth of a mile per gallon above the standards, placed by the Obama administration.
Preempting state attempts to regulate truck emissions, passing a rule to moderately limit truck emissions aimed at halting any states from passing even more stringent rules.
Repealing a requirement that state and regional authorities track tailpipe emissions from vehicles traveling on federal highways, limiting the collection of data on emissions and our ability to mitigate them.
Learn More About Mikes Plans
