Climate and Environmental Justice
For too long, low-income communities and communities of color have experienced disproportionate impacts from the use of fossil fuels, including higher rates of related health effects. And, too often, low-income neighborhoods, people of color and people with disabilities have been hurt first and worst when disaster strikes. Rather than step up to support these communities, President Trump has rolled back environmental protections, undermined the EPA and doubled down on his support for the fossil fuel industry.
Mike Bloomberg will put environmental justice at the center of federal decision-making. He will reverse Trump’s rollbacks of environmental and health safeguards and put stronger limits in place for toxic pollution. He will consult with tribes, community leaders and environmental justice advocates on priority-setting and policymaking. He will improve and expand data and mapping tools to better understand communities at risk.
How Mike Will Get It Done:
Make environmental justice a national priority
Reverse Trump’s assaults on health and environmental rules
Consult with tribes and community leaders, and expand data to better inform policymaking
Prioritize affordability and jobs in building a clean energy economy
Mike’s Plan:
Make environmental justice a national priority
Mike will put environmental justice at the center of federal policymaking, directed by the White House, with environmental justice offices in every federal department. He will include justice and equity criteria in environmental reviews under the National Environmental Policy Act, as well as in Office of Management and Budget reviews of budgets and policies.
Reverse Trump’s assaults on health and environmental rules
Mike will reverse Trump’s dangerous rollbacks of environmental, health and safety rules and put in place stronger standards, including limits on carbon pollution, toxic mercury pollution and groundwater contamination by coal waste. He will restore Trump’s damaging cuts to the EPA’s budget and increase funding for enforcement of environmental rules.
Consult with tribes and community leaders and expand data to better inform policymaking
Mike will make consultation with affected communities a standard part of the policymaking process. He will consult with tribes, community leaders and environmental justice advocates on criteria for new policies and on setting stronger pollution limits, particularly to protect the most affected communities. Mike will expand and improve on the EPA’s data and mapping tools to help identify and understand risks in these communities, including by enhancing local pollution monitoring.
Prioritize affordability and jobs in building a clean energy economy
Mike will ensure that the benefits of a clean energy economy — including lower energy bills from efficiency and renewable power, lower gas bills as electric vehicles replace polluting ones, reduced air pollution and good-paying jobs building new infrastructure — flow to the communities that have been most affected. He supports clean energy incentives for low-income families. Mike will create a new program to let low-income families trade in older polluting vehicles for electric ones or vouchers for transit. He also will tailor incentives for upgrading energy performance in buildings so that every family can afford to do it.
Mike will make environmental justice a national priority and reverse Trump’s assaults on health and environment rules.
Mike’s Record:
Mike has a strong record of protecting communities from the worst impacts of climate change.
In 2011, Mike helped launch the Sierra Club’s Beyond Coal campaign, which has helped close more than half of America’s coal-fired power plants, reducing pollution and advocating for support for workers and communities affected by the shift from coal to a clean energy economy. In 2019, he launched Beyond Carbon, the largest-ever campaign to combat the climate crisis in the United States. Beyond Carbon is supporting the elected officials and citizens leading this fight and activating voters to make sure America transitions to a 100% clean energy future as soon as possible.
As mayor, Mike increased energy efficiency and reduced New York City’s carbon footprint by 13 percent. He helped make the city’s air the cleanest it had been in 50 years. He launched a rapid bus initiative that reduced the commute of more than 200,000 daily riders. Mike also pushed for the extension of the 7 subway line, the first subway extension funded by the city in more than 60 years. And he created 400 miles of bike lanes across the city and launched the Citi Bike bike share program.
