Drug Prices
Prescription drug prices are high and continue to rise, overwhelming families and straining hospital budgets. Mike’s solutions take bold, innovative steps to reduce drug costs.
How Mike Will Get It Done:
Cap out-of-pocket drug costs for Medicare beneficiaries
Authorize Medicare to negotiate drug prices
Require Part D plans to promote the most cost-effective drugs
Allow imports of safe drugs from abroad
Eliminate drug company payoffs to pharmacy benefit managers
Change intellectual property law
Keep Up With Mike
Keep Up With Mike!
Drug prices are a top concern for families across the country, and they’re a top concern for Mike. As president, Mike will take an innovative and all-encompassing approach to lower drug prices for the American people.
President Trump promised that he would lower drug prices, yet in the first seven months of 2018, there were nearly 100 price hikes for every price cut. He continues to make promises and cover for them with misleading claims, but the facts are irrefutable: the price of 3,400 drugs was increased at a rate five times higher than inflation during the first six months of 2019.
Mike’s Plan
Make Medicare Cheaper for Seniors and Use It to Lower Drug Prices for Everyone
Cap out-of-pocket drug spending for Medicare beneficiaries at $2,000 annually.
Authorize Medicare to negotiate the drug prices from the pharmaceutical industry. Allow commercial insurers to also use the negotiated price to lower drug prices for everyone, including those not on Medicare, and save taxpayers approximately $456 billion over ten years.
Require Medicare Part D health plans to promote the most cost-effective drugs, including generics, reducing premiums and co-pays for Medicare beneficiaries and overall U.S. health care spending.
Allow Imports of Safe Drugs from Abroad and Fix America’s Health Care Competition Problem and
Americans should be allowed to buy medicine from other countries, provided those countries have drug-quality control up to American standards.
Fulfill a promise Donald Trump has made and broken by eliminating drug company payoffs to Pharmacy Benefit Managers (PBMs), payments that manipulate drug prices and game the system.
Lower Drug Prices and Boost Research by Changing Patent and Intellectual Property Law
Bring generic drugs to the market faster by limiting brand-name drug makers to one patent that lasts 20 years. Today, brand-name drugs account for 72% of U.S. drug spending despite representing only 10% of all prescriptions. Their prices also rise year after year far faster than inflation. Brand-name drugs are a major contributor to high drug prices for consumers and high overall U.S. spending.
Require drug companies to pay royalties to the National Institutes of Health if they use NIH IP and turn it into a commercial drug product. These revenues can be used to lower drug costs for people on Medicare and to fund additional research.
Mike’s Record
As Mayor of New York, Mike championed visionary ideas – like allowing New Yorkers to import prescription drugs from Canada and programs like discount prescription drug cards for all New York City residents – that helped make New York City a world leader in health care, quality of life and life expectancy.
In 2011, Mike launched the BigAppleRx prescription card, which offers substantial discounts on prescription drugs to New Yorkers. In its first six months, BigAppleRx saved New Yorkers more than $1.5 million, or a 47% discount on prescriptions for the average user. The card is still available to all New Yorkers regardless of age, income, citizenship or health insurance status, as Mike originally implemented it.
Mike has a record of supporting Americans who want to buy prescription drugs from Canada. In 2003, he urged the Food and Drug Administration to allow New Yorkers to purchase prescription drugs from Canada, saying, “If the Canadians can produce drugs that the FDA says are effective and safe and well-labeled, then I would like to see New Yorkers being able to benefit.”
Learn More About Mikes Plans
