E-Cigarettes and Vaping
As Mayor of New York City, Mike Bloomberg took on the tobacco industry and won. Now, with the U.S. facing another public health epidemic  more than 5 million middle- and high-school children used e-cigarettes in 2019  Mike is taking action again.
Today, 97% of minors who use e-cigarettes report that they use flavored products. Flavors are familiar to children and serve as a way to lure kids to the product. Exposure to nicotine, which is highly addictive, can have significant repercussions for kids brain development. While the Trump Administration has promised action to protect our kids, they have backed away from their promise to ban all flavored e-cigarettes. As president, Mike Bloomberg will make vaping a public health priority and ensuring the industry is no longer able to target children and peddle their dangerous products.
Mike’s Plan
As president, Mike will:
Direct the FDA to prohibit the sale of all flavored e-cigarettes, as well as all menthol-flavored tobacco products.
Flavored products – designed for and marketed to minors – are the tobacco industry’s big bet on the future of their business. Unlike President Trump, who has made the profits of JUUL and other tobacco companies his priority, Mike will put the health of children and families first by banning flavored e-cigarettes.
Reduce tobacco use by increasing the federal tax on cigarettes by $1.
Mike has a proven record of saving lives by taking on the tobacco industry. By raising the federal cigarette tax by $1 per pack and raising the taxes on cigars, e-cigarettes and pipe tobacco to be on par with cigarettes, Mike’s plan will discourage people from getting started in the first place.
Fight back against addiction.
Nicotine levels in e-cigarettes are precisely boosted to increase the chance of addiction in children. The same is true of traditional cigarettes and other tobacco products marketed to all ages. As president, Mike will mandate the reduction of nicotine in tobacco products to make them less addictive.
Make it easier for smokers to quit.
The government should help people quit tobacco and nicotine. As president, Mike will make health insurance companies cover counseling and cessation medicines for smokers trying to quit. These services will be provided without copays, prior authorization requirements or limits on the duration of treatment. Mike will also require the FDA to expedite the approval of improved smoking-cessation products through its Center for Drug Evaluation and Research.
Get the facts.
Mike has a favorite saying, “In God We Trust. Everyone else bring data.” To tackle the smoking epidemic, we need to get the facts. As president, Mike will restore and increase funding for data collection on smoking and vaping in America.
Mike’s Record
As both a mayor and a philanthropist, Mike has led the charge against tobacco companies and their dangerous products in the United States and around the world.
As Mayor of New York City, Mike introduced and spearheaded the passage of the New York City Smoke-Free Air Act, a landmark law under which the city became one of the first municipalities in the United States to ensure smoke-free restaurants and bars. Paired with a higher cigarette tax, free nicotine patches and a public awareness campaign, the results were remarkable: Mike’s efforts prevented 10,000 premature deaths over a decade and life expectancy in New York City saw a three-year increase, outpacing national trends. Mike’s leadership on smoke-free air helped spark a national movement; today, more than 22,000 municipalities representing more than 80 percent of the U.S. population are covered by state or local smoke-free air laws.
As a result of Mike’s groundbreaking and comprehensive approach to tobacco prevention policies during his time as Mayor of New York City:
New York City’s adult smoking rate dropped from 21.5% in 2002 to 16% in 2012, a 26 percent decline.
Smoking among New York City public high school students dropped from 17.6% in 2001 to 8.5% in 2011, a 52 percent decline.
Hospitalization rates for smoking-related illnesses in New York City declined 21% from 2000 to 2010.
There were more than 350,000 fewer smokers in New York City in 2013 than in 2002.
Since 2007, Mike Bloomberg has committed more than $1 billion to combat tobacco use worldwide, estimated to save more than 35 million lives.
LEARN MORE ABOUT MIKES RECORD
