Early Childhood Learning
Mike believes it’s the president’s job to make children’s lives better, for their future, and for America’s. Research shows that the most important phase of a child’s brain development happens before he or she turns five, and yet today, spending in the United States on early childhood education is among the lowest of developed countries. As president, Mike will improve the lives of working families and improve the lives of children.
How Mike Will Get It Done:
Improve the quality of child care
Make child care more affordable
Guarantee access to full-day preschool
Provide at-home health care support to working families
Mike’s Plan:
Raise the quality of child care.
As president, Mike will improve the quality of child care by supporting the creation of a nationally-recognized credential for early childhood professionals and starting an “Apprenticeship Degrees” initiative that will encourage professional development for home-based child care providers.
Today, the average pay for a child care worker is $11.17/hour. Mike will recognize the hard, important work of these professionals by raising the federal minimum wage to $15/hr and studying the creation of a refundable tax credit for early childhood teachers to boost earnings for the lowest-paid teachers. He will also provide grants to states who close the salary and benefits gap between pre-K and kindergarten teachers in low-income areas. Finally, Mike will expand child care options to areas not currently reached by using a place-based EITC to incentivize child care businesses opening in underserved communities.
Stand with Mike on the issues to help defeat Donald Trump and get big things done.
Make child care more affordable.
We know one of the most significant challenges facing working parents today is the cost of child care. As president, Mike will triple the number of children served by Early Head Start, which provides child care to low-income infants and toddlers, and expand Head Start to reach more three to-five-year olds. He will also significantly boost the percentage of families who receive child care subsidies through the Child Care and Development Block Grant (CCDBG) and expand the Child and Dependent Care Tax Credit (CDCTC) to allow more low-income and middle-class parents to deduct the cost of child care expenses.
Guarantee access to full-day preschool.
As president, Mike will work to streamline our country’s patchwork approach to early learning. He will guarantee access to full-day preschool for all three- and four-year-olds, so that every child is ready to succeed in Kindergarten. He will also incentivize cities and states to develop innovative programs that help low-income children bridge any language gaps and prepare them for success in kindergarten. Mike will restore grants for states to reach the goal of universal access to pre-k and reward those that boost enrollment of low- to moderate-income students and increase the quality of programs.
Provide at-home health care support to working families.
In an effort to improve the health of at-risk infants and children, Mike’s plan will increase the numbers of low-income families who receive free, voluntary nurse home visits by boosting funding for the Health Resources and Services Administration’s Maternal, Infant, and Early Childhood Home Visiting Program. This program has been shown to lower maternal mortality rates and increase the self-sufficiency of families down the road.
Mike’s Record:
Mike Bloomberg has a proven track record of supporting families. As mayor, he put more than $100 million dollars into the pockets of New York’s low-income families through the creation of the Child Care Tax Credit, and signed legislation making it easier for single parents to collect child support.
