El Paso Adelante
Mike’s plan for Latinos in the U.S. (El Paso Adelante, The Path Forward) invests in Latino communities to boost prosperity and economic security. President Trump has vilified, dehumanized and hurt the Latino community. As president Mike Bloomberg will reverse that damage by addressing hate crimes and gun violence, closing the education, wealth, and health gap between Latinos and whites, and creating pathways to citizenship for millions of Latinos in the U.S.
As Mike said in El Paso while introducing the plan, “We need to bring security to the 60 million Latinos who Donald Trump has vilified, even though they’re the very people who make our country great. And I don’t only mean physical security from attacks like the one we saw in El Paso. I mean the security of knowing your kids will have a quality education, knowing you will be able to afford health care, and knowing you will be safe from climate change. That’s the goal of The Path Forward we released today. And together, we will get it done.”
Make Your Voice Heard in 2020
Join Mike on this issue to help defeat Donald Trump and get big things done.
Mike’s Plan
As President, Mike will ensure that the Latino community feels fully embraced and is able to prosper. Mike’s plan  brings real and inclusive economic opportunity for Latino families. He will:
Close the college completion gap between whites and Latinos within 10 years and ensure that Latinos have the education that will open doors to better futures
 Mike’s plan will enable more Latinos to be able to afford quality college education without taking on crushing debt to complete their degrees.
His plan will make public colleges and universities free for low-income students and will offer more “learn and earn” opportunities through apprenticeships.
Mike’s plan also provides more Latinos with opportunities to gain credentials and work experiences needed for middle-skill jobs that provide family sustaining wages.
Build Latino wealth by empowering entrepreneurs and improving access to capital in order to double the number of Latino-owned businesses with employees in 10 years
Mike’s plan will narrow the income and wealth gaps between Latinos and whites through higher wages, higher levels of home ownership and business growth.
He will reform financial systems so that Latinos have greater access to credit and banking costs less. Mike will modernize our borders so that goods and services move faster and more securely.
Reduce the gap between Latinos and whites for chronic diseases that disproportionately impact Latinos
His plan will expand access to health care and provide children and families with healthier living environments.
Mike’s plan will also increase access to healthier foods and homes ensuring Latinos lead healthier lives.
Clear the naturalization backlog and create a path to citizenship for the 11 million undocumented immigrants
His plan will provide permanent protections for Dreamers and Temporary Protected Status (TPS) holders, shielding them from deportation and putting them on a pathway to citizenship. Additionally, the plan will expand immigration legal services.
Mike’s El Paso Adelante plan also includes comprehensive approaches on addressing gun violence, domestic violence, hate crimes, climate change, voting rights and other issues impacting the Latino community.
Download Mike’s Plan for Latino Empowerment
Download
Mike has a long record of championing the Latino community
As Mayor of New York City, Mike signed executive orders guaranteeing immigrants rights to government services and medical care, as well as protecting victims of crime regardless of immigration status. Mike made significant education reforms for public schools and colleges that resulted in higher graduation rates for Latino students. He also launched initiatives to support immigrant-owned businesses.
In addition, he established NYCitizenship to help city government employees who were permanent residents apply for citizenship, and later expanded the initiative to families of NYC public school students. He also expanded legal services to immigrants by adding a full-time attorney to the City’s Family Justice Centers to counsel domestic violence victims and secured a full-time immigration attorney from each of the City’s 10 indigent criminal defense providers.
