LGBTQ+ Equality
The fight for equality for LGBTQ+ Americans has made incredible strides – from marriage equality to the repeal of “Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell” to advances against HIV. But we have a long way to go, and progress is being reversed by the Trump administration’s efforts to dismantle protections for LGBTQ+ people. A patchwork of state laws leaves millions of LGBTQ+ people at risk for workplace, health care and housing discrimination; there is a crisis of violence against transgender people, especially trans women of color.
Mike will reverse President Trump’s attacks on LGBTQ+ Americans, resume the march towards equal rights and protections in every part of the country, and restore America’s leadership in the global fight for LGBTQ+ equality.
How Mike Will Get It Done:
Fight for passage of the Equality Act
Address disparities in health care coverage and treatment
End the HIV/AIDS epidemic by 2030
Protect LGBTQ+ youth and families
Ensure the safety of LGBTQ+ Americans in the justice system
Reverse the ban on transgender individuals in the military
Mike’s Plan:
Guarantee equal treatment and equal rights
Mike will fight to pass the Equality Act to guarantee protection for LGBTQ+ people in all facets of life—employment, housing, credit, education, public accommodations and federally funded programs—and will take executive action to ensure equal benefits and protections for LGBTQ+ federal government employees, as well as employees of firms that do business with the federal government. Mike will also step up anti-discrimination enforcement by conducting affirmative, systematic civil rights testing to identify and address LGBTQ+ discrimination.
Expand health coverage and care
Mike will expand health coverage through a Medicare-like public option, ensure coverage of gender-affirming care, and fund bias training for health professionals that includes the LGBTQ+ community. He will invest in research, care and prevention to end HIV/AIDS by 2030, including fully funding the Ryan White CARE Act and making PrEP available without a prescription; and ensure mental health coverage, improve screening and treatment for depression and address substance use disorder.
Protect LGBTQ+ youth and families
Mike will launch a federal “Respect for All” initiative to combat bullying, harassment and discrimination. He will promote school-based mental health programs, including suicide prevention efforts, and protect LGBTQ+ youth from the harmful practice of conversion therapy. Mike will expand support for shelters and services for homeless and runaway youth, and ensure equal treatment of child and families in the child welfare system, as well as LGBTQ+ seniors in federally funded long-term care facilities.
Ending violence and hate
As president, Mike will establish a comprehensive approach to addressing violence against LGBTQ+ people, especially transgender women of color. He will make hate and bias crimes a top federal priority; reauthorize the Violence Against Women Act and fund family justice centers and community-based programs like Cure Violence; and mandate oversight, accountability and training for federal law enforcement. He will fund training in de-escalation and implicit bias, and investigate and reform police agencies with an abusive history, including against LGBTQ+ people.
Reaffirm America’s LGBTQ+ Leadership
Mike will restore White House leadership on LGBTQ+ issues at home and abroad, appointing cabinet members and staff who represent the full diversity of the country. He will recommit the U.S. to the effort to eradicate HIV/AIDS worldwide by 2030. Mike also will reverse the ban on transgender individuals serving in the military and rescind the exclusion of coverage of gender-affirming care in the Veterans Health Administration – and he will review and restore honorable discharges and military benefits to veterans who were discharged solely for being LGBTQ+ prior to the repeal of Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell.
Mike’s Record:
Mike has been a longtime supporter of, and vocal advocate for, LGBTQ+ rights.
As mayor, Mike extended anti-discrimination laws to include gender identity in 2002. He also implemented a number of initiatives to reduce LGBTQ+ youth homelessness, including a program to help families support homeless or at-risk LGBTQ+ youth.
During Mike’s tenure, New York City’s public hospital system became the first public health care system nationally to mandate comprehensive training to address LGBTQ+ health disparities.
Mike has supported marriage equality since 2005 and helped lead the effort to pass marriage equality in New York State through a Republican legislature and officiated a same-sex wedding on the first day it was legal.
For four years running, Mike’s company, Bloomberg L.P., has been designated one of the “Best Places to Work for LGBTQ Equality,” earning a 100% rating on the Human Rights Campaign Foundation’s Corporate Equality Index.
