Foreign Policy
Mike Bloomberg knows from decades of experience how rapidly our world is changing. As president, Mike will repair the damage done by President Trump and return the United States to a position of global leadership.  He will strengthen all elements of American national power, investing in education, cutting-edge infrastructure and RD, and reviving a sophisticated and principled diplomatic corps. He will partner not just with other nations but with cities, businesses and civil society groups to address the challenges of this century, not the last one. Most importantly, he will return thoughtful, evidence-based decision-making to the White House so that, at this moment of unprecedented challenge and opportunity, America will continue to lead and prosper.
How Mike Will Get It Done:
Protect Americans against new threats
Rebuild the foundations of American power
Reinvigorate alliances with U.S. partners
Drive global action to fight climate change
Restore presidential leadership
Mike’s Priorities:
Protect Americans against new threats
After leading New York City’s recovery from the 9/11 attacks, Mike knows that defending our country and its citizens is a president’s most important task. For 12 years, he was responsible for protecting the lives of millions who live and work in one of the world’s most vital cities. He will do the same for all Americans, not only investing in the technologies needed to win on the battlefield of the future but hardening U.S. defenses against new threats, from cyber-attacks to bioweapons to infectious diseases.
Rebuild the foundations of American power
To meet the long-term challenge posed by rising powers such as China, the U.S. must first rebuild its strength at home. Mike will invest in 21st century infrastructure and world-class STEM education, promote innovation ecosystems around the country, implement a more efficient immigration policy that welcomes talent from all over the world and increase research funding so that the U.S. maintains its advantages in next-generation technologies such as artificial intelligence and quantum computing.
Reinvigorate alliances with U.S. partners
The greatest source of American strength abroad is not our tanks or planes or ships, but our partnerships with countries in every corner of the world. Mike will repair those frayed relationships, giving the State, Treasury and Commerce Departments the mandate and resources to intensify diplomacy, promote democracy and human rights and negotiate high-standard trade deals. And he will lead new regional coalitions to safeguard American interests, modernize international institutions and deter potential rivals.
Drive global action to fight climate change
The threats of tomorrow can’t be solved by statesmen sitting in oak-paneled rooms. Much wider global engagement is required to counter such diffuse challenges, none more so than climate change. As outlined in his detailed climate plans, Mike will direct the kind of concerted international response that this multi-faceted emergency demands, reducing U.S. carbon pollution 50% by 2030, rallying other countries to cut their own emissions and helping developing nations withstand the impacts of climate change.
Restore presidential leadership
Mike transformed New York City by hiring the smartest and most capable professionals, and listening to their advice. He put in place decision-making structures that enabled fast, well-considered action. He defined priorities and kept the focus on them—and he worked closely with partners around the country and the world to achieve results. After years of chaos, impulsive actions and dangerously short-sighted decisions from the Trump administration, Mike will at last return steady and effective leadership to the White House.
Mike’s Record:
From running a multinational company and philanthropy, to serving as mayor of the world’s most international city, to his work as a United Nations special climate envoy, Mike has forged partnerships around the world to bolster global health, protect the environment, build resilient communities and save lives. He understands intimately just how critical U.S. leadership and values are at this moment, and how much work is needed to renew both.
Mike led New York City’s recovery from the worst terrorist attack ever perpetrated on U.S. soil. Under his leadership, the NYPD’s counter-terrorism unit helped stop several terrorist plots and kept the city’s eight million citizens safe.
Mike is the president of the board of the C40 Cities Climate Leadership Group, a network of the world’s megacities dedicated to finding and implementing proven climate solutions.
Mike was appointed by United Nations Secretary-General António Guterres as Special Envoy for Climate Action, with the charge of supporting the UNSG’s climate strategy and mobilizing support for a more ambitious approach to fighting climate change.
Mike served as the World Health Organization’s Global Ambassador for Noncommunicable Diseases and Injuries, supporting global efforts to protect people and save lives by helping to spread proven solutions and building partnerships between cities and local leaders.
Mike is the founder of Bloomberg Philanthropies, whose mission is to ensure better, longer lives for the greatest number of people. It has worked in 510 cities and 129 countries.
Mike created the Bloomberg Global Business Forum, which brings together government and business leaders to collaborate and find solutions to big challenges.
Mike created the Climate Finance Leadership Initiative, which brings together seven of the world’s largest financial institutions with the goal of helping to fund and support ambitious climate plans.
