Gun Safety
Every day 100 Americans are killed by gun violence. It’s simply too easy for people who pose a risk of violence to themselves and others to get guns. Most Americans support common sense gun safety laws like stronger background checks. But President Trump’s unacceptable deference to the gun lobby has allowed the bloodshed to continue. Mike’s solution builds on his decades of standing up to the gun industry and protects 2nd Amendment rights while enacting common sense laws that save lives.
How Mike Will Get It Done:
Keep guns out of the wrong hands
More effective background checks
Tackle daily gun violence in the hardest-hit communities
Ban assault weapons and protect schools
Confront the gun lobby head-on
Stand With Mike
Stand With Mike
Meet Calandrian Simpson Kemp: Watch the powerful ad
Calandrian’s son, George Kemp, Jr., was killed by gun violence in 2013. She is an active member of Moms Demand Action, a grassroots organization of Americans fighting for public safety measures that can protect people from gun violence.
Learn More
Meet Calandrian Simpson Kemp: Watch the powerful ad
Calandrian’s son, George Kemp, Jr., was killed by gun violence in 2013. She is an active member of Moms Demand Action, a grassroots organization of Americans fighting for public safety measures that can protect people from gun violence.
Learn More
Mike’s Plan
Mike believes we need a president who will make gun violence a top priority – and who has a track record of taking on the NRA… and winning. He’s done it.
Mike’s candidacy is about getting things done. That’s why he has offered a new gun safety policy proposal aimed at stopping the epidemic of gun violence in America. This comprehensive gun safety policy includes five key pillars designed to create an effective background checks system, keep guns away from people who pose a danger to themselves or others, protect young people in schools and Americans in their homes, tackle daily gun violence in the hardest-hit communities, and confront the gun industry head-on.
Mike’s comprehensive gun safety policy proposal includes:
More effective background checks
Create an effective background check system so that no one can purchase a gun without passing a completed background check.
Require point-of-sale background checks for all gun sales and finally close the private sale loophole, which enables prohibited people to buy guns simply by finding unlicensed sellers at gun shows or on the Internet.
Require every gun buyer to get a permit before making a purchase.
Use sales records to identify crime guns and notify local police when individuals have been prohibited from having a gun. A central system will let local authorities know when a gun owner has become barred from having firearms – due to a criminal conviction or a restraining order.
Allow for extreme risk screening before guns are purchased so that issuers would be equipped to deny permits to troubled people who pose a danger to themselves or others.
Curb the dangers of downloadable guns and ghost guns by reversing Trump’s proposed firearm export regulations that loosen oversight of gun exports—and make it easier to publish 3D-printing gun blueprints online. And work to pass legislation barring online publication of those files.
More than 36,000 people are killed with guns in the U.S. each year. 2,900 are children.
Keep guns out of the wrong hands
Close loopholes, including one that prohibits married domestic abusers from possessing guns, but not many unmarried ones.
Close the “boyfriend loophole” which allows domestic abusers to have guns, despite criminal convictions or restraining orders—simply because they are not married to their victims.
Pass a federal red flag law that expands extreme risk orders to 50 states—and funds state efforts to maximize the policy.
Require gun buyers to be at least 21 years old to buy handguns and semi-automatic rifles and shotguns.
Set a temporary ban on gun possession by assault and other violent misdemeanor offenders.
Tackle daily gun violence in the hardest-hit communities
Fund at least $100 million annually for local violence intervention programs.
Increase ATF funding by up to $100 million annually so that the Bureau is able to police the gun industry more effectively.
Fund at least $100 million annually for public health research into gun violence.
Require all gun buyers to wait at least 48 hours before any firearm purchase.
Make straw purchasing and trafficking stand-alone federal crimes, with serious penalties for offenders in order to help stop illicit sales.
Require all gun owners must report to police if their firearms have been lost or stolen, within 3 days after they know or should know that their guns are missing.
Firearms are the second leading cause of death for children and teens and the first leading cause of death for Black children and teens in the U.S.
Protect our children and communities by banning assault weapons, protecting schools, and preventing unintentional shootings
Reinstate the federal ban on assault weapons and high-capacity magazines.
Require secure storage of firearms which have been shown to reduce the risk of child gun injuries by up to 85 percent. However, an estimated 4.6 million American children live in houses with an unlocked gun.
Ban all guns in K-12 schools, colleges, and universities – except for law enforcement.
Hold the gun industry accountable and elevate government’s response to the gun violence crisis
Repeal the Protection of Lawful Commerce in Arms Act (PLCAA) so that gunmakers and gun dealers will no longer have broad immunity from civil lawsuits.
Allow the Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC) to treat guns like other household products so that the federal government will have the power to set safety requirements for gun technology.
Formally declare the gun violence crisis to be a public health emergency to expedite funds and research.
Appoint a White House gun coordinator to mobilize the public to fight gun violence and launch an interagency hub to fight gun violence.
Focus executive energy on suicide reduction, school safety interventions, and corporate partnerships.
Gun Violence Survivors Tell Their Stories
SEE ALL STORIES
Stand with Mike on Gun Safety
Sign up to make your voice heard and help Mike stop the gun violence crisis.
Join Us
Mike’s Record
When Mike first started working on gun violence some 15 years ago, not many politicians in either party were interested in talking about the issue.
As mayor, Mike took on gun dealers and gun show vendors across the country that were feeding the criminal market. He co-founded Mayors Against Illegal Guns, a coalition that grew to 1,000 mayors and revived an issue that many Democrats had left for dead.
During Mike’s time as mayor, firearm deaths decreased by 46% and the firearm death rate was less than a third the rate in the rest of the country. And, when he left City Hall, he didn’t walk away from this fight – he got even more involved. Having merged Mayors Against Illegal Guns with the grassroots group Moms Demand Action for Gun Sense in America, he helped launch Everytown for Gun Safety – which has six million supporters and is the country’s most powerful grass-roots force for gun safety.
Taking on the NRA
At a time when elected officials from both parties ran from the NRA, Mike built national gun safety coalitions to take them on. He has spent years and hundreds of millions of dollars fighting gun violence and supporting successful campaigns for smart state safety laws. As president, Mike will continue to back common-sense policies that save lives.
Mayors Against Illegal Guns
In 2006, Mike founded Mayors Against Illegal Guns with Boston Mayor Thomas Menino. It grew to a coalition of over 1,000 mayors across the country.
Everytown for Gun Safety
In 2013, Mike merged Mayors Against Illegal Guns with the grassroots group Moms Demand Action for Gun Sense in America and helped launch Everytown for Gun Safety. Everytown has helped to defeat dozens of gun lobby-backed bills each year in states. In 2018 alone, this included “permitless carry” bills in 17 states that would allow concealed carry with no permit whatsoever, bills that would allow guns in K-12 schools in 18 states, and bills that would require colleges and universities to allow guns on campus in 16 states. For more detail on Everytown and Moms’ victories, see a full timeline here.
12 states have passed or expanded background checks since 2013, with MAIG/Everytown playing a critical role in victories in CO, WA, OR, NV, NM, NJ, CA, and VT.
29 states and DC have passed a total of 51 domestic violence laws since 2013, including states like AL, IN, LA, KS, ND, SC, and UT.
15 states and DC have enacted red flag laws since Newtown, and Everytown was instrumental to passing each one.
In 2018, Everytown spent $30 million on targeted contributions, independent expenditures, and voter mobilization. In 110 Everytown-supported races that year, the vast majority of candidates won. Everytown was the largest outside spender in the 2019 Virginia legislative elections, spending $2.5 million to help flip both houses of the General Assembly and deliver a gun sense majority to the NRA’s home state.
Mike Bloomberg visits Austin to attend a Moms Demand Action event, January 11th, 2019.
Midterm Elections
Mike spent $110 million to elect candidates strong on gun safety in the 2018 midterm elections, including helping to elect 21 of 24 candidates backed in Congressional swing districts, which was crucial to Democrats retaking the House.
Mike as Mayor
As Mayor of New York City, Mike took on gun dealers and gun show vendors across the country that were feeding the criminal market. He co-founded Mayors Against Illegal Guns, a coalition that grew to 1,000 mayors.
Source: Summary of Vital Statistics for the City of New York 2002-2013
As mayor, Mike tackled gun violence by taking on the gun industry and cracking down on illegal gun sales. He filed federal lawsuits against 27 gun dealers in five states when guns they sold showed up on New York City streets—and the city’s undercover operations revealed they were not complying with federal law. The dealers settled with the city or had settlement terms imposed on them and agreed to clean up their operations.
The number of crime guns recovered in NYC from the five states where the City sued gun dealers dropped by 18% in the years after the suits were settled. The share of targeted dealers’ crime guns recovered in New York City declined by 75%.
The city’s undercover stings recovered 6,043 guns between 2004 and 2013 and also exposed that sellers at gun shows in multiple states were breaking federal laws.
Under Mike’s administration, NYC was an early adopter of creative interventions, such as Cure Violence, which engaged the members of the community directly impacted by a violent event. These interventions reduced retaliatory gun violence in communities traumatized by violent episodes by as much as 63%.
Learn More About Mikes Plans
Mike Bloomberg Explains His Plan To Save Lives With His Gun Safety Policy
