Housing Affordability and Homelessness
Rental costs have soared while incomes have stagnated, burdening Americans with exorbitant housing costs. Each night, nearly 600,000 Americans sleep in the street or in a temporary shelter — one-third of whom are families with young children. Mike’s solution puts affordable housing within reach of all Americans, treats homelessness as a national emergency, and works to cut homelessness in half by 2025.
Double annual federal spending on homelessness
Guarantee rental assistance to extremely low-income Americans
Create hundreds of thousands of new affordable housing units
Help renters become homeowners
Use regulation and incentives to curb housing discrimination
Mike Bloomberg has a plan to make sure that a stable home is within reach of all Americans.
As president, Mike will ensure that Americans are no longer burdened by exorbitant housing costs and prioritize rental assistance for those that need it most. The plan will also cut homelessness in half by 2025, while alleviating the nation’s severe shortage of affordable housing through robust new strategies to stimulate new and affordable housing development.
Mike’s plan builds on his remarks in Stockton, CA, last December, where he pledged to address the nation’s severe shortage of affordable housing, raise the incomes of low-wage workers, share the gains of economic growth more equitably, and take immediate steps to end poverty.
Mike’s strategy outlines reforms and investments aimed at getting more Americans into places they’ll be proud to call home, where they can realize their full potential.
Mike Announces His Plan for Affordable Housing
Mike knows that affordable housing is an essential component of dignity and economic opportunity and is key to strengthening our urban communities. His plan is grounded in a stark reality — incomes have stagnated while rental costs have soared.
Mike’s Housing Affordability and Homelessness Strategy:
At a glance, Mike’s Housing Affordability and Homelessness Initiatives:
Guarantee rental assistance for the lowest-income Americans
Cut homelessness by half in four years, from nearly 600,000 to less than 300,000
Alleviate the nation’s severe shortage of affordable housing, break down barriers to building in places where people want to live, and ensure that housing is accessible to those who need it
Help renters become owners and ensure that no one is denied access on the basis of their race
Help local governments cut through red tape and empower cities to enact change
Guarantee rental assistance for the lowest-income Americans
Mike’s plan will work to put affordable housing within reach of all Americans, ensuring that they can achieve an economic foundation without putting an excessive part of their income toward the roof over their head.
Mike will prioritize support for those who need it most.
He will guarantee housing vouchers to all Americans at or below 30% of the area median income and help families stay in their homes by funding emergency financial assistance, expanding federal grants to cities that implement effective eviction prevention programs, and creating pilot programs for tenant counseling and legal-advice services.
He will raise the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) and increase the Child Tax Credit for low-income Americans, families, and hard-pressed areas.
Mike will remove barriers to housing access and safeguard against housing discrimination.
He will recruit more landlords into the voucher system and reduce bureaucratic processes.
He will use regulation and incentives to curb discrimination by landlords, so that recipients are protected regardless of income source, sexual orientation, or immigration status.
He will establish navigator services to help tenants find and secure housing.
Cut homelessness by half in four years, from nearly 600,000 to less than 300,000
Treating it as a national emergency, Mike will deploy immediate and unprecedented federal resources to tackle the homelessness crisis in America and make clear to city leaders across America that reducing homelessness and treating people with dignity and respect must be central to their agendas.
Mike will ensure every American has a stable roof over their head.
He will make homelessness a national priority – doubling federal spending on homelessness from under $3 billion to $6 billion annually.
He will increase federal support for rapid rehousing strategies and provide housing search support and short-term rental assistance to stop homelessness before it starts.
Mike will expand proven housing-first strategies to support and stabilize homeless communities.
He will promote rapid-rehousing and permanent supportive housing, providing stability to the chronically homeless to address issues such as substance use disorder and mental health services where needed and serving as a bridge to rental assistance.
He will integrate homeless support with critical “wrap-around” services and expand federal grants to cities that implement effective homelessness prevention programs.
Alleviate the nation’s severe shortage of affordable housing, break down barriers to building in places where people want to live, and ensure that housing is accessible to those who need it
Mike knows we cannot solve the affordability crisis in our cities without more housing and will get to work building the millions of new affordable units we need to address this crisis.
Mike will increase the supply of affordable housing units nationally – lowering costs for middle and low-income residents.
He will expand the Low-Income Housing Tax Credit and enhance its value.
He will prioritize new transportation funding for areas that have undertaken progressive zoning reform and reward municipalities that support affordable housing development in neighborhoods with good schools, transportation, and economic opportunity.
He will help bring public housing back into good condition by streamlining the allocation of HUD’s RAD program and increasing funding for the National Housing Trust Fund.
Mike will improve the existing housing stock to revitalize communities, lower operating costs, and lower carbon emissions.
He will provide resources to help homeowners, building owners, and tenants upgrade their homes, to lower operating costs, save energy, and eliminate pollution.
He will increase funding for energy retrofits and ensure that the Low-Income Home Energy Assistance Program is fully funded and designed to encourage efficiency improvements.
He will also provide funding for seniors to modify their homes to be more accessible, allowing them to continue living in their communities as they age.
Help renters become owners and ensure that no one is denied access on the basis of their race
Mike recognizes that generations of discriminatory public policy — such as redlining — have prevented millions of Americans from accumulating housing wealth and left them concentrated in high-poverty, low-opportunity neighborhoods.
Mike will help renters become homeowners.
Mike will pilot targeted assistance to help people afford down payments for new homes, provide federal matching funds to offer all residents of the 100 Communities down-payment assistance, and broaden access to basic financial services.
With the goal of supporting one million new Black American homeowners, Mike will address inequities in wealth and home ownership, and enforce laws designed to ensure that developers, landlords, and lenders act fairly.
Help local governments cut through red tape and empower cities to enact change
Mike knows that government must work together at all levels to solve the housing crisis.
Mike will promote coordination between all levels of government and stakeholders to address the housing crisis.
He will build on President Obama’s “Strong Cities, Strong Communities” initiative by driving an interagency effort from the White House and support efforts to widen inclusive participation in decision-making, require participating cities to collect data to improve our ability to respond to the crisis and invest in data and technology infrastructure to help cities collaborate, spend money wisely, and invest in what works.
Trump
Mike’s plan directly combats the destructive policies being implemented by the Trump Administration to severely restrict housing availability and decrease affordability.
The Trump administration has pushed for the relaxation of the Fair Housing Act’s anti-discrimination Disparate Impact Rule, which will make it more difficult for a person or entity to bring a suit against discriminatory housing practices. Just this week, Trump’s Housing and Urban Development Secretary moved to roll back an Obama-era anti-discrimination policy that incentivizes cities to combat housing segregation.
President Trump himself is no stranger to discriminatory housing policy: in the 1970s, Trump and his father were sued by the Justice Department for discriminatory housing practices in 39 of their New York City properties.
Under the Trump administration, the number of Department of Housing and Urban Development apartments cited for unsafe, unhealthy, and physically deteriorating living conditions has risen and federal reports found that HUD failed to protect hundreds of thousands of children living in subsidized housing from potential exposure to lead paint and lead poisoning.
Trump has proposed cuts to housing benefits each year of his administration. His 2020 budget would remove $4.6 billion in public housing funding and eliminate money for 140,000 housing vouchers.
Homelessness has risen every year under Trump despite his boasting the US economy is the best it’s ever been.
Mike Bloomberg travels to Stockton, California to meet with Stockton Mayor Michael Tubbs and unveils proposals focused on affordability and economic opportunity for all Americans on December 11, 2019.
Mike’s plan for tackling the housing affordability and homelessness crisis facing America is based on his track record as mayor of New York City and as a leading philanthropist committed to addressing the most pressing issues facing American cities. Under his leadership, New York City created the largest affordable housing program in the country.
As mayor, Mike:
Launched the nation’s most ambitious plan to expand affordable housing. The New Housing Marketplace Plan was the largest affordable housing program in the country, building or preserving 175,000 units. This plan led to a $23.6 billion investment in affordable housing across the city.
Made the development of affordable housing more appealing to the private sector through inclusionary zoning, which led to the creation of thousands of units of affordable housing in new buildings.
Helped New Yorkers reduce their monthly mortgage payments and combated the foreclosure crisis by creating the Center for NYC Neighborhoods, which became a national model for foreclosure assistance.
Launched the Homeless Outreach Population Estimate (HOPE), an annual homeless census initiative, to better account for and serve unsheltered individuals.
Created HomeBase, an award-winning program adopted by the U.S. HUD to mobilize community groups, landlords, tenant associations, and others to keep 90% of at-risk families out of city shelters and in their own homes.
Supported the creation of 9,000 affordable housing units for nine distinct populations, including youth and families with special needs – referred to as the “most ambitious commitment to supportive housing in history.”
Shuttered NYC’s controversial Emergency Assistance Unit, replacing it with PATH – a new state-of-the-art 24-hour intake center for single pregnant women and families with children in need of emergency shelter.
Immensely increased the Mayoral budget allocated for homeless and poverty programs to 83% higher than when he took office.
Launched eight-shelter “Next Step” model for single adults who need intensive case management.
Entered partnership for “Safe Haven,” a pilot program that allowed individuals to enter shelters without traditional barriers like sobriety and curfew restrictions. The initiative later expanded citywide and currently boasts 1,200 beds.
Created a task force to study veteran homelessness with the U.S. Veterans Affairs and HUD, leading to investment to remodel existing and create new housing for 10,000 homeless veterans.
As a philanthropist, Mike:
Funded ambitious efforts to tackle the housing affordability crisis in cities through programs including the American Cities Initiative, a $200 million initiative to empower city leaders to tackle their most pressing problems like housing affordability and homelessness.
Supported Bloomberg Philanthropies’ What Works Cities and U.S. Mayors Challenge to provide technical support and funding to help cities like Detroit, Newark, and Austin make housing more affordable for all residents.
