Infrastructure
America’s infrastructure system is broken. Traffic is getting worse, roads are unsafe, airports are congested, drinking water is contaminated, communities lack high-speed internet, and we’re not ready for climate emergencies. Our crumbling infrastructure weakens our economy. Mike’s solution is to implement a truly visionary national infrastructure plan that will tie investments to clear goals: better roads, safer bridges, cleaner water, reliable power, and broadband for everyone.
How Mike Will Get It Done:
Build a smarter transportation network
Repair 240,000 miles of roads and 16,000 bridges by 2025
Ensure airports can handle more passengers
Expand broadband access to all Americans by 2030
Fix water infrastructure, starting with cities in crisis
Invest in clean buildings, transportation, and power
Keep Up With Mike!
Keep Up With Mike!
Mike Bloomberg has a plan to bring the nation’s infrastructure into the 21st century while making it smarter, faster, safer, and greener.
Mike’s plan equips and empowers local officials to address critical issues, acknowledging that not only do mayors best understand their infrastructure needs, but also that job creation, economic development, and efforts to fight climate change are most effective at the local level. The plan invests more than a trillion dollars in funding to state and local governments and includes investments tied to clear goals: better roads, safer bridges, clean air and water, and reliable power and broadband for everyone.
Mike’s policy will be the most community-driven infrastructure plan to get people and goods moving faster. His plan will require states to distribute 100 percent of the federal infrastructure funds intended for cities directly to cities, and create a national capital budget specifically dedicated to major, long-term infrastructure projects.
Mike’s plan
Smarter: Building Infrastructure for the 21st Century
America has never had a coherent, national vision for transportation. Mike will set national goals for a transportation network that will connect people to jobs, increase equity, improve accessibility, and more. Mike’s plan will create the first-ever national map that traces all road, rail, transit, air, and freight routes, to identify where gaps and obstacles exist, and leverage data from both the public and private sectors to make smarter decisions on transportation investments and safety. As Mayor of New York City, Bloomberg launched PlaNYC, a comprehensive strategy that identified challenges impacting growth and set goals for New York City’s infrastructure.
Faster: Reduce Congestion and Bottlenecks to Get America Moving
The nation’s transportation network is crumbling. Mike’s plan will repair 240,000 miles of roads and 16,000 bridges by 2025, and allocate $850 billion over 10 years to critical capital investments in roads, bridges, dams, and other infrastructure – helping to create millions of jobs. Jobs created under the plan will have strong Davis-Bacon/Buy American labor protections, and Mike will ensure workers are selected from low-income and minority communities through boosted apprenticeships and training programs.
He will establish a $1 billion annual “pothole” fund to make emergency repairs and expand Surface Transportation Block Grant Program funding to $30 billion a year. Require that states devote a quarter of their grants to fixing any local bridges in poor repair. And, over the next five years, Mike will triple funds annual federal investment in public transit, including $12 billion per year in a new operating assistance program to improve service and attract new users. Mike will ensure that transit is accessible for seniors and those with disabilities. And, he will also triple funds for local alternative transportation projects, including bike lanes.
As President, Mike will also:
Develop a strategy for a faster, better connected rail network.
Make our Airports fit for the 21st century.
Spread Broadband to Increase Opportunity.
Fix our Overloaded Freight System.
Safer: Safe Water and Safe Homes for everyone.
Mike’s administration will save 20,000 lives by 2025 by drafting and implementing America’s first national safety plan, using data and creating federal “complete streets” design standards to reduce road fatalities. His plan will also address the 100 cities with the worst water infrastructure by the end of his first term, and cities in crisis, including Flint and Newark, in his first 100 days. The plan includes an investment of $100 billion over 10 years to ensure clean drinking water for all communities, and $175 million over five years for the Water Infrastructure Finance and Innovation Act program to accelerate local investment in water infrastructure, as well as an increase in the EPA’s Clean Water State Revolving Fund and the Drinking Water State Revolving Fund to $6.6 billion annually to ensure a long-term commitment to protecting water supplies.
Greener: Every American deserves to breathe clean air.
Mike’s plan will create a Climate Resilience Finance Corporation with $100 billion annually in Treasury credit authority to provide loans, loan guarantees, and grants to states, cities, and the private sector to build out and upgrade the building, transportation, and grid infrastructure needed to reduce carbon pollution and increase resilience to climate change impacts.
In addition, Mike will modernize the nation’s power grid for the 21st century and build a clean energy future. He will also provide funding to transition to pollution-free electric vehicles and implement standards to build a pollution-free transportation system running on clean energy. He will also launch a Zero-Emissions Trucks and Buses Hubs Program in 10 to 15 big metro areas to bring ports, shippers, and other private and public operators of trucks and buses (including school and transit buses) together with manufacturers to jump-start electrification of ports and freight hubs. And Mike will upgrade America’s building stock to reduce pollution and save families and businesses money on energy bills.
Make your voice heard in 2020
Join Mike on this issue to help defeat Donald Trump and get big things done.
Join Us
Mike’s plan includes commitments to:
Repair all of America’s busiest roads and bridges by 2025 and save Americans billions of dollars in lost time and productivity.
Save 20,000 lives by 2025 by adopting safe street designs, lowering speed limits, and implementing other safety measures.
Build a 21st-century energy grid that expands clean energy access to over 150 million more Americans and allows renewables to compete on a level playing field.
Give millions of Americans more and better transportation options, including electrifying the highway system and increasing the production of electric vehicles to reduce carbon pollution.
Retrofit millions of buildings to modernize the nation’s building stock and reduce indoor and outdoor air pollution.
Mike’s plan will impact individual sectors:
Roads  Bridges: Repair 240,000 miles of roads and 16,000 bridges, saving the average commuter $300 per year by 2025.
Airports: Build fast rail links to 10 of the U.S.’s busiest airports by 2030.
Transit: Expand and improve public transit for 50 million Americans.
Rail: Devise a strategy for developing high-speed rail and complete one high-speed rail line by 2025 and three by 2030.
Broadband: Expand broadband access to 10 million more Americans by 2025 and to all by 2030.
Water: Ensure clean water in the 100 most vulnerable communities by 2025.
Regional service: Prevent millions of rural Americans from losing access to convenient air travel.
Download Mike’s Plan to Bring America’s Infrastructure into the 21st Century
Trump
President Trump has pledged repeatedly to prioritize infrastructure and the federal government has allocated trillions of dollars toward infrastructure without ever fixing the problem. He pledged on the campaign trail and as president that he would invest billions in infrastructure — and even declared an “infrastructure week” at least seven times — but he has failed to uphold his promises.
In 2018, Trump offered up a plan meant to “spur the biggest and boldest infrastructure investment in American history,” with up to $1.7 trillion in investment, but proposed to allocate just $200 billion to the plan; states and local governments were expected to foot most of the rest of the bill. It was all talk and no action.
Just last year, Trump made an agreement with Democrats to spend $2 trillion on infrastructure, but then walked away from it and said he wouldn’t work with Democrats unless they dropped their investigations into him and his administration. While Trump wasn’t keeping his promises, air quality has declined and progress addressing climate change has reversed. The Trump administration has also been trying to roll back mileage and pollution standards and failed to invest in the infrastructure we need to fight climate change and build resilience against its impacts.
Download Mike’s 21st Century Infrastructure Plan
Download
Mike’s Record
As Mayor of New York, Mike led an economic, cultural and environmental renaissance in the aftermath of 9/11. Mike helped to create nearly half-a-million new jobs, in a diverse range of fields including technology, health care and education. Tens of millions of square feet of new commercial space was created across the boroughs, and the industrial economy, which employs nearly half a million people, was buoyed. The growth also resulted in new revenues. The additional jobs, tourists, and residents generated billions more annually — money that was reinvested to help fund new initiatives and provide the services that residents, businesses, workers, and visitors deserved.
Mike’s commitment to, and focus on, expanding and improving New York City’s infrastructure played a critical role in that success. Highlights of his infrastructure efforts as mayor include:
Building a Strong Foundation for the Future: Record Investment in Core Infrastructure
Invested in NYC’s infrastructure to improve 6,000 miles of roads and repair the city’s nearly 800 bridges, increasing the city’s economic position and decreasing wasteful spending on short-term repairs.
Invested $6 billion over six years in bridge, road, lighting and ferry projects that strategically upgraded the city’s infrastructure to meet new needs, ambitious sustainability goals and to anticipate the impacts of climate change.
Increased paving and pothole-repair, bringing more NYC streets into good condition.
Fighting Climate Change and Pollution: Innovation in Green Policy from the Ground Up
In the aftermath of Hurricane Sandy, brought together city agencies to develop A Stronger, More Resilient New York, a $30 billion program to protect and strengthen the city from climate change
Increased use of reclaimed asphalt pavement, which is recycled pavement, to greatest use in nation, saving 174,000 tons of milled asphalt from landfilling a year while Mike was mayor, and avoiding 840,000 barrels of oil annually used to produce new asphalt cement, and eliminating 321,000 truck trips.
Replaced diesel-powered paving equipment with electric models, eliminating over 460,000 lbs. of CO2 and 125,000 lbs. of particulates per year, roughly equivalent to the emissions produced by 40 cars driven 10,000 miles.
Effective Management: Safest Streets in NYC History
Reduced traffic deaths 24% from 2001-2013 through innovative street designs, smart traffic management, and increased enforcement and education.
Implemented safety redesigns on 137 street corridors and at 113 additional intersections.
Investing in Neighborhoods: Public Space and Economic Development
Established a citywide plaza programs, bringing community space to 60 neighborhoods with poor access to parks or green space.
Public space is a key economic and livability strategy, making neighborhoods safer, more attractive and accessible for people of all ages and abilities.
Times Square project alone helped increase foot traffic from 350,000 to 466,000 daily, making it one of the most successful retail districts on the planet. The project also reduced traffic injuries by 35%.
Projects engage communities in the design, implementation and maintenance of plazas, creating local ownership.
Retail sales soared with these projects (172% increase in retail sales around plazas, 50% increase in retail sales on streets with bike lanes, 71% increase along rapid bus routes).
Strong Public-Private Partnerships: Citi Bike, NYC’s 1st New Transportation System in 60 years
Citi Bike is a model for public-private partnerships, creating a popular, affordable new transportation option at no cost to taxpayers.
Citi Bike is the nation’s largest and most successful bike share system, with more than 90 million rides in six years, now tripling in size to 40,000 bikes.
National Transportation Leadership: New Standards for City Streets
Innovative designs pioneered in NYC have become best practices in cities across the US and around the world, from safe intersections and pedestrian crossings to protected bike paths to rapid-implementation plazas.
Access to Opportunity: Six Rapid Bus Routes in Six Years (2008-2013)
Select Bus Service is an innovative, rapid-implementation strategy to bring reliable transit to communities that lack access to jobs, schools and services.
Sped the commute of 215,000 daily passengers.
Increased mobility and access to opportunity for communities with poor transportation options.
Mike’s innovative program has since expanded to 17 routes covering more of NYC’s transit deserts, bringing faster bus service to 600,000 daily passengers (27% faster than local routes).
Learn More About Mikes Plans
