Labor
Workers across the country are struggling. Americans’ purchasing power has not meaningfully increased in the past 40 years, and too few workers receive paid family leave or sick days. Union membership has steadily declined, depriving many workers of a vital voice to advocate for fair wages and benefits and workplace protections. Despite his campaign promises, President Trump has repeatedly turned his back on America’s workers. Mike will protect working Americans, making sure employees have the right to organize, and receive the fair wages, paid family leave and retirement benefits they deserve.
How Mike Will Get It Done:
Raise the federal minimum wage to $15 an hour and expand overtime protections
Require employers to give 12 weeks of paid family leave and 7 days of sick leave
Strengthen union protections
Empower vulnerable communities of workers to organize
Protect workers’ pensions and retirement savings
Mike’s Plan:
Raise the federal minimum wage to $15 an hour and expand overtime protections
Mike will raise the federal minimum wage to $15 an hour and increase it automatically in future years by linking it to growth in earnings. He will restore the Obama administration’s overtime rule, which expanded the number of workers eligible for overtime, and he will extend it further by updating the wage threshold.
Ensure all employees have 12 weeks of paid family leave and 7 days of paid sick leave
Mike will require employers to provide employees 12 weeks of paid family leave. And he will ensure all employees receive 7 days of paid sick leave.
Mike will protect working Americans, making sure employees have the right to organize, and receive the fair wages, paid family leave and retirement benefits they deserve.
Strengthen union protections
Mike will prohibit “right to work” laws for private-sector unions. He will guarantee public-sector employees have the right to unionize and bargain collectively. Mike will protect union elections, establish a scheduled process for initial contracts, enable franchise workers to bargain directly with corporate headquarters and promote sectoral bargaining in industries where workers are highly organized but face barriers to unionization.
Empower vulnerable communities of workers to organize
Mike will ensure farmworkers and domestic workers are covered by minimum wage, overtime pay and other essential labor standards, and will protect them from workplace harassment. He also will expand protections to include undocumented workers,  ensuring they can join unions, report labor violations and receive remedies without fear of immigration consequences.
Foster an innovative 21st-century workforce
Mike will ensure “gig economy” workers receive full employee benefits, create portable benefits that stay with workers when they switch jobs and help displaced workers to build the next phase of their careers.
Protect workers’ pensions and retirement savings
Mike will make sure Americans’ multiemployer pension plans remain solvent and that workers do not lose their retirement security. He also will ensure all workers who pay into Social Security, including public-sector employees, receive their full benefits.
Take the lead federally
Mike will model good labor practices with federal dollars, awarding contracts to companies with strong benefits for workers and a clean record on labor violations. He will support federal employees: issuing their paychecks during shutdowns, protecting their benefits, and enabling them to rotate between departments and into the private sector.
Mike’s Record:
Mike is a self-made entrepreneur who built his company from scratch and now employs 20,000 people. He has a strong record of operating a great place to work. He provides employees with one of the most generous parental leave policies of any company in the U.S.
As mayor, Mike raised pay for New York City’s teachers by 43% and unionized municipal employees by 35%. He also helped the Service Employees International Union Local 32BJ negotiate on an industry-wide basis.
Mike has defended the right to organize, speaking out against efforts in several states to weaken labor rights.
