LGBTQ+ Equality
Mike Bloomberg has a comprehensive policy to ensure LGBTQ+ equality, including a commitment to equal treatment of all LGBTQ+ Americans in the workplace and their communities, addressing disparities in health care and treatment, protecting LGBTQ+ youth and families, and ending violence against LGBTQ+ people.
First and foremost, Mike will reverse the multitude of policy setbacks to LGBTQ+ Americans under the Trump administration. Over the past three years, the Trump administration has acted to dismantle federal protections and resources for LGBTQ+ Americans, including stripping transgender people of their recognized identities and civil rights and nominating judges and officials with strong anti-LGBTQ+ records.
Mike will pass and sign the Equality Act into law, ensuring that LGBTQ+ Americans have consistent non-discrimination protection in a variety of areas, including employment, housing and access to credit, just to name a few. He also pledged to reinstate benefits for veterans who left the military before the repeal of the “Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell” policy, called for protections for LGBTQ+ people in refugee and asylum systems, and said the U.S. would resume its leadership position on the world stage by advocating for the rights of LGBTQ+ people across the globe.
Join Proud With Mike
Sign up to join a coalition of supporters to help Mike defeat Donald Trump and get big things done.
Mike’s plan
Mike will fight for equality for all Americans, and will restore U.S. leadership on LGBTQ+ rights at home and around the world.
Mike will ensure equal treatment of LGBTQ+ Americans in the workplace and in their communities
He will fight for and sign the Equality Act and take executive action to protect LGBTQ+ federal employees and contractors; create new opportunities for all Americans, including LGBTQ+ people, to thrive and succeed economically; protect LGBTQ+ housing rights and increase access to affordable housing; and increase investment and resources, like rural broadband access and community health centers, to support LGBTQ+ people living in rural communities.
He will address disparities in health care coverage and treatment for LGBTQ+ people and work to end the HIV/AIDS epidemic by 2030
Mike will expand health coverage through a Medicare-like public option, ensure coverage of gender-affirming care, and fund bias training for health professionals that includes the LGBTQ+ community; invest in research, care and prevention to end HIV/AIDS by 2030, including fully funding the Ryan White CARE Act and making PrEP available without a prescription; and ensure mental health coverage, improve screening and treatment for depression and address substance use disorder.
Mike will protect LGBTQ+ youth and families and promote safe and inclusive schools
He will launch a federal “Respect for All” initiative to combat bullying, harassment and discrimination; promote school-based mental health programs and strengthen suicide prevention efforts; protect LGBTQ+ youth from the harmful practice of conversion therapy; expand support for shelters and services for homeless and runaway youth; and ensure equal treatment of child and families in the child welfare system, as well as LGBTQ+ seniors in federally funded long-term care facilities.
Mike will take a comprehensive approach to addressing the epidemic of violence against transgender women of color
He will make hate and bias crimes a top federal priority; reauthorize the Violence Against Women Act and fund family justice centers and community-based programs like Cure Violence; mandate oversight, accountability and training for federal law enforcement, pressure states to follow suit, fund training in de-escalation and implicit bias nationwide, and investigate and reform police agencies with an abusive history, including against LGBTQ+ people; and, as part of his commitment to reforming the criminal justice system, work to drastically reduce incarceration, fund mental health and substance use disorder services for incarcerated people, and reverse the Trump administration policy that prevents transgender people from accessing facilities, services and basic necessities that are consistent with their gender identity.
Mike will have the United States once again lead by example
He will do so by appointing staff and cabinet members who reflect the full diversity of the country; recommitting the U.S. to the Global Equality Fund and the effort to eradicate HIV/AIDS worldwide by 2030; appointing a Special Envoy on LGBTI issues at the State Department and combating LGBTI criminalization by foreign governments; reversing the Trump administration’s ban on transgender individuals serving in the military; and affirming protections for LGBTQ+ people in America’s refugee and asylum systems.
Download Mike’s LGBTQ+ Equality Policy
Download
Mike’s Record
Mike has been a longtime supporter of, and vocal advocate for, LGBTQ+ rights. As mayor, Mike extended anti-discrimination laws to include gender identity. He also launched the Commission for Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender and Questioning Runaway and Homeless Youth and implemented a number of initiatives to reduce LGBTQ+ youth homelessness, including a program to help families support homeless or at-risk LGBTQ+ youth. During Mike’s tenure, New York City’s public hospital system became the first public healthcare system nationally to mandate comprehensive training to address LGBTQ+ health disparities. Mike has supported marriage equality since 2005 and supported the fight for same-sex marriage in New York State, Maryland, Washington State and Maine.
And, four years running, Bloomberg L.P. has been designated one of the “Best Places to Work for LGBTQ Equality,” earning a 100 percent rating on the Human Rights Campaign Foundation’s Corporate Equality Index (CEI). Bloomberg, L.P. is also a partner on the Global Equality Fund.
