Infrastructure: Minnesota
Climate change and other environmental problems are directly linked to our deteriorating infrastructure. Broken roads and lack of transit keep us stuck in traffic; and our power grid was built for an era of coal and gas instead of the wind and solar we are shifting to. Both coal and gas are primary contributors to the pollution that causes climate change, asthma attacks, and heart conditions. The effects in Minnesota are real—
Extreme Heat
As the climate changes, Minnesota is one of the fastest-warming states in the country and is expected to see an increase in both extreme rainfall and drought. Summers are already getting muggier.
Invest in making American communities more resilient to storms, floods, extreme heat, drought, and other climate impacts, with a focus on vulnerable low-income communities.
Lead a national effort to strengthen resilience and restore forest health to reduce catastrophic wildfires.
Darker red represents more extreme heat days recorded (Source: CDC. National Environmental Public Health Tracking Network)
Air Quality
Nearly 262,000 Minnesotans suffered from asthma, exacerbated by pollution, in 2017. The state generates less than 21% of its energy from renewable resources.
Move the country to 100% clean and renewable energy as quickly as possible, with affordable clean energy available to low-income families. Improve gas mileage and pollution standards for cars and trucks, make electric vehicles affordable for all families, set a path to 100% of new cars being electric by 2035, and replace oil and gas burning equipment in buildings with pollution-free alternatives.
Darker gray represents poorer air quality (Source: CDC. National Environmental Public Health Tracking Network)
Traffic Congestion
Minnesotans driving in urban areas spend an average of 35 hours per year in traffic congestion, ranking 41st of the 50 states. Fewer people are using public transit in greater Minneapolis, thus moving toward even worse traffic congestion and increased greenhouse gas emissions.
Triple funding for public transit, expand and improve rail and bus service for 50 million Americans.
Roads and Bridges
One mile in 13 of Minnesota’s urban highways are in poor condition, and one in 19 of Minnesota’s bridges are at risk of becoming dangerous if they do not receive repairs.
Repair 240,000 miles of roads and 16,000 bridges by 2025. Provide $1B to fund emergency pothole repairs every year.
Streamline federal rules to speed funding to needed projects, without compromising communities and the environment.
Each red dot represents a structurally deficient bridge (Souce: Federal Highway Administration: National Bridge Inventory (NBI))
Broadband
Less than 25% of Minnesotans have broadband internet access in the counties with the highest unemployment rates.
Ensure fast and affordable rollout in rural counties, expanding broadband access to 10 million more Americans by 2025 and to all by 2030.
Darker red represents lower access to broadband internet (Source: United States Census)
Flooding
Invest in making American communities more resilient to storms, floods, wildfires, drought, and other climate impacts, with a focus on vulnerable low-income communities.
Flood claims on buildings (Darker = more claims) (Source: FEMA: National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP))
