Mike’s Vision for a National “311”
Citizens deserve a government that works for them. The federal government is not delivering. Dealing with government agencies is inefficient, time-consuming and well below private-sector standards. When Mike gets to the White House, he will create a national 311 service that will allow people to connect directly with the federal government, obtain information instantly across all platforms and receive reliable access to benefits and services.
How Mike Will Get it Done:
Establish a national 311 service that citizens can call, text, email or tweet 24/7
Improve the 20 highest-priority federal services used by the public
Partner with existing 311 programs in cities to create a seamless system for providing services at all levels of government
Help expand local 311 services to underserved communities across the country
Mike’s Plan:
Establish a national 311 system that will provide services across all platforms
Citizens will be able to access information and services and report problems to a central hub that will coordinate help for all federal agencies.
Identify the 20 highest-priority consumer-facing government services
Mike’s plan will upgrade customer service to a standard comparable to the private sector. This includes little-to-no wait times, mobile-friendly “trackers” on the status of requests and the resolution of all requests in a short time frame.
Set a goal of creating a network of local 311 services across the country.
Mike will work with local leaders to build on the success of existing programs and expand the reach of 311 into new communities.  
Mike’s Record:
Mike will get this done, because he’s done it before as mayor of New York City.
He established a 311 system for New York City that continues to operate 24 hours a day, seven days a week, in nearly 180 languages. It allows people to submit photos and videos with their requests for service improvements. Citizens called for help 160 million times in the program’s first 10 years and rated their satisfaction above the private sector standard.
Before Mike integrated 311, the city government had 40 different call lines to city agencies and no centralized way for the public to get information from the right source. Insights from residents enabled innovative new methods to identify and resolve quality of life issues. The service has become an essential tool for government accountability and a data-driven guide to areas that the city should address. New York City’s 311 system also has become a model for international and domestic cities.
