Native Americans and Tribal Sovereignty
Native Americans’ efforts to preserve sacred lands, combat climate change, protect indigenous languages and cultural traditions, and honorably serve in the U.S. military are important contributions to our nation. Under Donald Trump, the respect Native Americans and tribal leaders deserve has been neglected in favor of a rhetoric and policy of hate.
Mike believes the federal government must honor the special treaty and trust relationship with Native American tribes. Tribal nations have long been deprived of a meaningful partner in Washington, D.C. and with Mike’s presidency that will come to an end. He will treat tribal leaders with the peer-to-peer respect they deserve. As president, Mike will reverse historical injustices, affirm tribal sovereignty, and protect the most vulnerable Native Americans from the disparities of health care, violence, drug addiction, and economic opportunity facing Native Americans today. The first people of our great country will be prioritized, not patronized, under Mike’s administration.
How Mike Will Get It Done:
Reaffirm Indian Country land rights, upgrade infrastructure, and combat environmental injustice
Elevate tribal authority and protect Native American women and girls
Improve health care for Native Americans
Enhance economic and educational opportunities for tribal members
Mike’s Plan:
Reaffirm Indian Country land rights, upgrade infrastructure, and protect Native lands from environmental degradation
Mike will rebuild tribal homelands by reaffirming and restoring the Interior Department’s authority to take tribal lands into trust. He will assess and fund tribes’ infrastructure needs and bring high-speed internet to the nearly one-third of people living on tribal lands who lack it. Further, Mike will reauthorize the Native American Housing Assistance and Self-Determination Act to improve housing in Indian Country. Donald Trump has rolled back environmental protections in favor of large, polluting corporations. Mike will reverse Trump’s actions to ensure Indian Country has clean air and clean water. He will also negotiate for indigenous rights protection in all international climate agreements and engage in full and meaningful consultation with tribes on federal land management.
Strengthen tribes’ legal and civil rights, protect indigenous women and girls, and elevate Native voices in government
Mike will expand tribal legal jurisdiction over crimes committed on reservations, while ensuring constitutional protections for all. He will launch an unprecedented effort to strengthen protections for indigenous women and girls, who face violence, sexual assault, and homicide, as well as trafficking, at disparate rates. As part of these efforts, Mike will work with Congress to Pass Savanna’s Act, reauthorize the Violence Against Women Act with strong protections for Native communities, and direct the Justice Department to work with tribes to investigate cases of Missing and Murdered Indigenous Women (MMIW). Mike will support and defend the Indian Child Welfare Act to ensure that Native children are not unnecessarily separated from their communities.
Mike will appoint a senior White House adviser for Native issues to elevate tribal issues to the top of the federal government and restore the Tribal Nations Conference. He will discourage states from imposing unreasonable voting requirements on Native Americans and encourage them to accept tribal IDs as valid voter identification.
Improve health care for Native Americans
Under Mike, the Indian Health Service will be fully funded — including facilities operated by the IHS and tribes, as well as Urban Indian Health Programs — and that funding will be mandatory. By increasing access to mental health care and supporting the Native American Suicide Prevention Act, Mike will also lower Native Americans’ extraordinarily high rate of death by suicide. Mike will end the opioid and behavioral health epidemics affecting Native communities by expanding access to addiction treatment and mental health services.
Improve economic and educational opportunities for tribal members
Mike will raise the federal minimum wage to $15/hour. He will put money back into Native Americans’ pockets by expanding the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) and distributing it monthly, in line with people’s real needs. Mike’s plan triples direct federal Title III funding to Minority Serving Institutions (MSIs), including tribal two-year and four-year colleges. He will also invest in job creation and entrepreneurship by increasing federal funding for Community Development Financial Institutions (CDFIs) and the Small Business Administration’s Small Business Investment Company (SBIC) Program.
Learn more about Mike’s Native American policy
Mike’s Record:
On the issues most important to indigenous peoples, Mike has a record of getting things done.
Mike has made the health and well-being of Americans and people in need around the world a centerpiece of his philanthropic work. As mayor of New York City and as a philanthropist, Mike has made record investments in the types of core infrastructure – like roads, water, and transportation – tribal communities and reservations need upgraded. Mike is a global leader in fighting to protect the environment, and he’s up to this fight of protecting Native Americans and other indigenous peoples from the heightened risks they face from climate change. Life expectancy for Native Americans is below other American populations. As mayor of New York City, Mike increased life expectancy by 3 years, outpacing the national average. Native Americans are disproportionately affected by addiction in the U.S. Mike fought opioid and other drug abuse in New York City, including restricting the prescription of powerful painkillers in emergency rooms. As a philanthropist, he launched a $50 million initiative to help states fighting the opioid epidemic, an effort that supports current programs and encourages the development of new solutions. Research suggests voter suppression measures cause Native Americans to have lower voter turnout rates than other communities in the U.S. Mike’s commitment to voting rights span from his time as mayor, where he proposed progressive reforms, through his more recent philanthropy, including his efforts to support voting rights.
