Pay Equity
Mike believes the time is long past due for all Americans to receive equal pay for equal work. But under Donald Trump, wage discrimination against women, especially women of color, remains a significant barrier to equality and economic empowerment. Today, American women are paid on average only 85 cents for every dollar men are paid. For Black women, the disparity is even greater: Black women make on average only 61 cents for every dollar white men make. As president, Mike will ensure equal pay for every American woman’s equal work.
How Mike Will Get It Done:
End practices that further the Gender Pay Gap
Collect the right data and put it to work
Raise the minimum wage to lift up low-income women
Recognize at-home work with tax refunds
Mike’s Plan:
Set labor rules to end the gender pay gap.
Mike’s plan will ensure American women receive equal pay for equal work, ending the pay gaps that exist in the vast majority of industries and across all educational backgrounds. Mike will set rules for employers to ban the use of an employee’s salary history to set wages and prohibit the retaliation against workers who discuss wages with one another. Mike will also take a holistic approach to employee pay, just like he did in the private sector, by establishing “comparable work” standards so that women who perform the same substantive job as men are paid at the same rate regardless of job title.
Collect the right data and put it to work.
Donald Trump has done everything in his power to hide the wage disparities carried out under his watch. Mike believes in using data and transparency to combat wage discrimination and achieve pay equality. As president, Mike will strengthen protections that require large employers to report on annual wages by gender and race. Under Trump, who was stopped by the courts from overturning these rules, the data are collected but won’t ever see the light of day. This lack of transparency is harmful to women and perpetuates the long-standing problem. Mike will also hold employers – including government agencies, contractors, and subcontractors – to account to explain why women are paid less than men when they are and will end discrimination where it is found.
Stand with Mike on the issues to help defeat Donald Trump and get big things done.
Raise the minimum wage and recognize at-home work.
Nearly 70% of low-wage jobs (those that typically pay less than $10/hr) are held by women. As president, Mike will increase these women’s wages to $15/hr, indexed to inflation, and extend this higher wage to all domestic workers, not all of whom are currently subject to federal minimum wage law. Today, more than 8 million women are stay-at-home parents, and more than 40 million Americans offer care for parents and relatives. Caregiving is work, and the federal government should stop ignoring that reality. Mike knows that recognition of Americans’ work shouldn’t stop at the front door. As president, Mike will pilot expanding the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) to include at-home caregiving, giving tax relief to those caring for their children and other family-members.
