100% Clean Power  Communities First
Mike Bloomberg commits to propelling the country to full decarbonization as soon as humanly possible and before 2050, and slashing emissions by 50% across the entire U.S. economy in ten years. To get there, Mike will slash greenhouse gas emissions in three sectors: electricity, buildings, and transportation.
In this electricity sector plan, Mike calls for phasing out all carbon and health-threatening pollution in the electricity sector, ensuring 80% clean electricity by the end of his second term of office. Mike’s plan builds off the analysis and findings from this year’s America’s Pledge report, which he presented to the international climate community at COP 25 in Madrid.
At a Glance, Mike’s 100% Clean Power  Communities First Initiatives:
Completely phase out emissions in the electricity sector
Accelerate the deployment of clean energy resources that expand the U.S. economy and create millions of jobs that are able to support families
Invest first in communities that have suffered most from coal pollution or have been left behind in the transition to clean energy
Mike’s plan
Completely phase out emissions in the electricity sector
By 2028, 80% of electricity-generation in the U.S. will come from clean sources – moving toward 100% as soon as possible thereafter. To get there, Mike will:
Stop the rush to build new gas plants. He will move swiftly to set stringent carbon and pollution limits on new power plants – to avoid the buildout of new sources of emissions and pollution. Currently, more than 150 proposed new gas plants and related pipelines threaten to lock in high carbon emissions for decades. With coal declining in the U.S., gas is the leading contributor to dangerous emissions that accelerate climate change.
Replace all coal plants with clean energy no later than 2030. As his administration imposes increasingly stringent emissions and pollution limits, Mike will set firm dates to retire coal plants. He will work with community leaders, local officials and workers to ensure that community transition plans are in place. He commits to delivering the benefits coal field workers have been promised, and his plan to support broader economic development and jobs transition is forthcoming.
Commence the orderly replacement of existing gas plants. He will do so by setting increasingly stringent carbon emissions restrictions and health protections to provide for the orderly replacement of gas-fired power plants with clean energy resources. 
Offer incentives for innovations in data and technology to monitor and analyze sources of pollution, enabling stronger enforcement against polluters.
End all subsidies for fossil fuels – amounting to billions of federal dollars annually – including closing tax loopholes, ending tax breaks for drilling new oil and gas wells and deductions for royalties paid abroad, and eliminating excessive tax deductions for declining well production. 
Work with other countries to jointly end export assistance for fossil fuel investments.
Establish a moratorium on all new fossil fuel leases on federal lands. The Trump administration is encouraging oil and gas drilling on federal lands and in federally controlled waters by relaxing federal leasing policy. Federal lands account for about 40% of U.S. coal production, a quarter of oil production and one-eighth of gas production.
Accelerate the deployment of clean energy resources that expand the U.S. economy and create millions of jobs that are able to support families.
Mike knows the power of all levels of government in leading the clean energy transition. As president, he will:
Work across government institutions and levels to expedite the implementation of clean energy projects around the country. This includes expediting the siting of transmission and clean-energy projects, including on disturbed federal land and offshore, and working with states and railroads to streamline approval and siting of interstate transmission lines.
Improve the permitting process for offshore wind projects in conjunction with the states. 
Provide technical assistance and additional staffing for states to fast-track permitting for clean-energy projects, and ensure that all stakeholders are adequately consulted in siting decisions. 
Expand the Department of Energy’s Office of Energy Policy and Systems Analysis to include state-specific resources. 
Appoint members to the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission who will work collaboratively with the states and support efforts to protect the climate and public health. 
Invest in modernizing and expanding the electricity grid that enables greater consumer participation and two-way flows of energy and information. 
The transition to a 100% clean energy economy will not be possible without significant investments in research and development. Mike will:
Quadruple the federal RD investment in clean energy and a clean grid to at least $25 billion a year. 
Provide financial support to accelerate the use of clean-energy technologies. This includes extending and expanding solar and wind tax credits and, at the same time, create new tax incentives for private companies to improve clean-energy technology, including battery storage and green hydrogen. 
Help rural electric co-ops and public power agencies finance and manage the clean energy transition. 
Develop solutions to ensure that low-income families have equal access to clean energy.
Invest first in communities that have suffered most from coal pollution or have been left behind in the transition to clean energy.
For Mike, data-driven solutions are the key to many of his successes in government, business and philanthropy. As president, he will: 
Start by expanding investments to map the unequal exposure to pollution, the health impacts of climate change, and socioeconomic factors. This includes improving and expanding environmental justice mapping, data-gathering, and use of tools such as the EPA’s EJSCREEN and EnviroAtlas to cover all areas of the U.S., including territories and tribal lands, and use this information to identify communities at risk of adverse social, health, and economic impacts.
Enhance neighborhood- and community-level air and water pollution monitoring, including to identify and eliminate hotspots near current and previously-used coal-related facilities, including cumulative pollution from multiple facilities.
Increase funding for research on the effects of coal and fossil fuels on overburdened communities, and focus research grants and funding to benefit the worst-affected communities first, including studying the cumulative health and environmental effects of coal plants on communities and support efforts to continue monitoring of these sites.
Ensure that environmental justice is central to decision-making at all federal agencies. Mike will:
Use the National Environmental Policy Act so that climate risk, environmental impacts, and equity concerns are considered in all federal actions. Also incorporate these considerations into the Office of Management and Budget’s annual budget process.
Centralize planning of environmental justice from the White House by codifying the existing National Environmental Justice Advisory Council.  
Create environmental justice offices in every federal agency.
Ensure that there are more thorough consultations with community leaders, environmental justice advocates and scientists to determine criteria for all future rulemaking.
The Trump administration is rolling back many EPA rules that protect air and water from pollution due to coal mining, coal burning and the disposal of coal ash. It is, for example, undoing the Mercury and Air Toxics Standard for power plants, a standard that has reduced mercury air pollution more than 81%. Mike will: 
Reverse Trump rollbacks of clean air, water, health and safety, and waste rules that expose all Americans to dangerous levels of pollution from these sources – including by developing stronger limits on mercury, coal ash, and water and air pollution rules. 
Put an immediate stay on all litigation defending Trump rollbacks, and instruct agencies to begin rulemaking to undo them. 
Work collaboratively with all stakeholders to strengthen health and safety protections, starting with those communities that have borne the worst impacts of pollution. For example, this includes setting stringent new coal dust standards for coal trains.
With EPA penalties to corporate polluters in 2018 the lowest level in years, Mike will ensure that environmental laws are actually enforced. He plans to: 
Expand resources at the Environmental Protection Agency and Department of Justice nationally and regionally. 
Collaborate with community leaders impacted by coal and gas plants – including those living near coal mining or gas drilling sites, and along rail lines and pipeline corridors – to ensure that all communities have clean air and that their drinking water is safe. 
Publicize the data showing which companies are exceeding pollution and emissions limits, and reveal the public health and other effects of their failure to comply with the law.
The Trump administration is also undermining the scientific basis of EPA policies, including by restricting the studies that can be used in rulemaking. Mike will:  
Remove groundless restrictions on which scientific studies the EPA uses to set policy. 
Ensure that the EPA is effective and nonpartisan.
Restore respect, trust and dignity among the EPA workforce – and across the U.S. government. As a manager of the largest city in the country, and the founder of a successful company with more than 20,000 employees, Mike has always believed deeply in instilling dignity and respect for employees, and building strong teams he can count on. 
Download Mike Bloomberg’s Plan for 100% Clean Power
Download
Mike’s Record
Mike has a proven track record in cutting emissions in the power sector.
In 2011, Mike helped launch the Sierra Club’s Beyond Coal campaign, which has since shuttered more than half – 302 to date – of America’s coal-fired power plants, and counting. In 2019, he launched Beyond Carbon, the largest-ever coordinated campaign to combat the climate crisis in the United States. Mike Bloomberg’s Beyond Carbon is accelerating work underway in nearly every corner of the country, empowering the elected officials and citizens who are leading it, mobilizing voters who support it, and ensuring that America leads the way in upholding the Paris Climate Agreement — and moving beyond it.
When President Trump decided to pull the United States out of the Paris Climate Agreement in 2017, Mike joined Governor Jerry Brown of California to build America’s Pledge, a coalition of mayors, governors, business leaders, and others committed to keeping the United States on track to meet the global climate goals. Mike’s plan draws on the analysis and findings from this year’s America’s Pledge report, which Mike presented to the international climate community at COP25 in Madrid earlier this week. The report found that the combination of local, bottom-up leadership by cities, states, and businesses, with aggressive national action after the 2020 election, could reduce U.S. emissions by nearly half of 2005 levels by 2030.
The Issue
Reducing pollution from direct use of fossil fuels in buildings—such as burning natural gas, propane, and fuel oil in furnaces and water heaters—is critical to tackling the climate crisis and eliminating harmful building emissions.
About 85% of existing buildings will remain in use through mid-century; making them more efficient is critical to protecting the climate. There is also growing evidence that appliances we use every day in our homes, such as gas stoves, release air pollutants that can cause respiratory illnesses and asthma attacks.
Trump
President Trump, in addition to denying the existence of climate change, has continuously worked to undermine efforts to cut emissions, including delaying energy-efficiency standards for buildings.
The Trump administration recently unveiled significant changes to the National Environmental Policy Act that would make it easier for federal agencies to approve infrastructure projects without considering climate change.
The Rhodium Group estimates that building emissions continued to increase in 2019 — and emissions will stay on the rise if President Trump remains in office and continues to derail and rollback climate-forward policies.
Net-zero buildings are a key component of the Green New Deal, which Trump and his allies have unequivocally denounced.
Eight Trump properties in New York City do not comply with new regulations designed to slash greenhouse gas emissions, and face millions of dollars in fines.
The Trump administration has reversed energy efficient lightbulb standards, a backward step that could cost the average U.S. household more than $100 per year.
The Trump administration has proposed the withdrawal of efficiency standards for residential furnaces and commercial water heaters, standards that could save consumers more than $24 billion by 2050.
Under the Trump administration, the Federal Housing Administration no longer insures mortgages for homes with PACE liens, further eliminating the incentive for consumers to retrofit their homes for energy efficiency.
The Trump administration has refused to allow the Senate to act on the Kigali agreement to phase out super-pollutant HFC refrigerants — making the U.S. the only major industrial country to not ratify the international agreement. If universally adopted, the Kigali agreement could reduce warming by 0.5 degrees Celsius.
Download Mike Bloomberg’s Climate Experience
Download
