Public Health Preparedness
President Trump’s erratic leadership, go-it-alone approach, and distrust of science have put the country in a vulnerable position should a major public health emergency, such as the novel coronavirus, COVID-19, materialize. Mike has a plan for responding to public health emergencies built on his experience guiding New York City through numerous crises and his longstanding relationships with the nation’s premier scientists. As president, Mike will begin to rebuild our nation’s public health preparedness from the moment he takes office. He will protect Americans against pandemics by strengthening frontline preparedness at home and across the globe, supporting scientists, reestablishing the National Security Council’s Office of Global Health Security, fully funding the Centers for Disease Control  Prevention, and doubling the budget for research at the National Institutes of Health with funds directed toward vaccine research.
How Mike Will Get It Done:
Prepare hospitals for national emergencies
Fully fund the CDC Center for Preparedness and Response
Invest in international preparedness
Invest in science to be ready for public health challenges before they emerge
Mike’s Plan:
Prepare hospitals for national emergencies
Mike’s plan will direct all hospitals to comply with national emergency preparedness requirements. To help achieve this, Mike will require ongoing training programs at large city-hospitals to account for frequent staff turnover. He will also direct the federal Hospital Preparedness Program to provide smaller hospitals with the supplies and resources that they might need to respond to a public health crisis.
Fully fund the CDC Center for Preparedness and Response
Mike’s plan will fully fund the CDC Center for Preparedness and Response – including the Public Health Emergency Preparedness program, which helps U.S. state and local health departments address health challenges. He will also create an emerging infectious disease fund at the Biomedical Advanced Research and Development Authority to rapidly support the development of countermeasures, including diagnostics, therapeutics and vaccines.
Invest in international preparedness
Mike will reestablish the Office of Global Health Security at the National Security Council, which was disbanded under the Trump Administration. The Office will be responsible for preparing for and responding to disease and bioterrorism threats, including pandemics and will coordinate actions across all federal agencies and state and local governments.
Invest in science to be ready for public health challenges before they emerge
Mike will double funding for the National Institutes of Health and dedicate a share of this investment towards researching new vaccines (including a universal flu vaccine), antiviral drugs and antibiotics.
Learn more about Mike’s Public Health Preparedness policy
Mike’s Record:
Mike Bloomberg has a successful history of preparing for and responding to public health challenges.
In 2006, as mayor of New York City, Mike unveiled a Pandemic Influenza Plan that included disease monitoring, building laboratory capacity, delivering vaccines and medicines, and preparing hospitals, mental health providers and city communications for a disease outbreak.
In addition, while Mike was mayor, the city’s syndromic surveillance system monitored 60,000 health events every day, from ER visits to foodborne illnesses to potential terrorist attacks.
