Public Lands, Parks, and Oceans
America’s public lands are a national treasure. They are part of our shared heritage and identity: The U.S. pioneered the idea of national parks, and America’s protected landscapes and iconic wildlife are known around the world. They are also under threat from the growing effects of climate change, which are exacerbated by President Trump’s rollbacks of environmental protections and opening up of millions of acres of lands and oceans for fossil fuel extraction.
We need to restore our public lands and do more. As president, Mike will reverse the Trump administration’s assaults on our parks, public lands, waters and wildlife, take action to make sure all Americans can access and benefit from them, set ambitious goals to protect 30% of our lands and waters, manage lands to increase climate resilience and carbon sequestration, and support local economies in gateway communities.
How Mike Will Get it Done:
Reverse Trump’s assault on national parks, public lands, and waters
Set new goals to better protect, restore and manage public lands, waters, oceans and parks. 
Conserve 30% of U.S. lands and waters, including oceans, by 2030.
Reform energy management to make federal lands carbon-neutral.
Ensure all Americans can access, benefit from, and enjoy parks and public lands
Break down silos between federal agencies, encourage collaboration with stakeholders, and streamline bureaucracy
Mike’s Plan:
Reverse Trump’s assault on national parks, public lands and waters
The Trump administration is carrying out an agenda that stands to cause unprecedented damage to public lands. Mike will put a stop to these assaults and restore protections. He will reverse Trump rollbacks of environmental rules across the board, reinstate monument protections for Grand Staircase-Escalante and Bears Ears, enact a moratorium on new leases for fossil fuel extraction on public lands and in offshore waters, and reinstate methane pollution limits for oil and gas production on public lands.
Set new goals to better protect, restore and manage public lands, waters, oceans and parks
To best protect communities, wildlife, and ecosystems against the worst impacts of the climate crisis, scientists call for protecting 30% of the Earth’s land and oceans no later than 2030. Mike will ensure that the U.S. more than doubles the amount of lands and waters protected in the U.S. from the current 12% to 30% by 2030. He will also triple federal funding for conservation, management, and restoration of public lands, with a focus on increasing resilience to climate change.
Ensure all Americans can access, benefit from, and enjoy parks and public lands
All Americans have a stake in our public lands, and Native American tribes have a relationship to these lands going back to time immemorial. Mike’s plan prioritizes respecting Native Americans’ relationship to ancestral lands, treaty rights, and sovereignty. He will also increase the use of national parks by diverse constituencies and partner with cities, states, and land trusts to expand and improve parks and increase access for all Americans and visitors from around the globe.
Break down silos between federal agencies, encourage collaboration with stakeholders, and streamline bureaucracy
Land management is divided among multiple agencies, often with adjoining lands, and can be controversial, as public lands are in the backyards of diverse communities yet belong to everyone, and various stakeholders have different views on how they should be managed. Mike will reform management to address these challenges, and prioritize on-the-ground collaboration.
Mike’s Record:
Mike’s approach to restoring, respecting, and protecting the country’s public lands, parks, and oceans is based on his record as mayor of New York City and as one of the world’s leading environmentalists. In City Hall, Mike’s administration converted 229 schoolyards to playgrounds and developed more than 300 acres of new parkland in just six years. This allowed 76% of New Yorkers to live within a 10-minute walk of public green space. As mayor, Mike led efforts to clean up vacant and blighted brownfield sites, protect the city’s water supply, and leverage public and private investment in conservation and management. Mike forged a notable partnership between the city and the National Park Service for co-management at Jamaica Bay, including plans for ecosystem restoration and research on increasing resilience. Mike’s foundation has supported one of the nation’s largest efforts to block offshore drilling and has invested in data-driven efforts to protect oceans and marine ecosystems, both by reducing overfishing and destructive fishing practices and by preserving coral reefs.
