Puerto Rico
Puerto Rico has been hard hit by climate change over the last twenty years. Its efforts to recover from disasters and build its economy are burdened by a federally-controlled debt restructuring process that has imposed draconian cuts to institutions that are the backbone of its public safety and disaster response.
Mike’s solution is to use reconstruction funds to rebuild the island’s infrastructure and economy. Ensure that Puerto Ricans are afforded the rights and support provided to other American citizens.
How Mike Will Get It Done:
Support full statehood for Puerto Rico
Implement a new debt relief plan
Expedite the release of reconstruction funds
Maximize local job creation from reconstruction
Create a decentralized and efficient power system
Invest in climate resilience
Keep Up With Mike!
Keep Up With Mike!
Mike has released an economic plan for Puerto Rico that includes resolving the island’s debt and budget problems, moving disaster response and rebuilding funds quickly, and planning reconstruction and other infrastructure investments to position Puerto Rico for long-term, sustainable economic success. Mike’s plan supports Puerto Rican efforts to overhaul the current electrical grid, to help Puerto Rico fulfill its vision for a 100% clean and renewable energy system that is decentralized and more resilient to future disasters. He also proposes changes to how the federal government supports disaster response and relief, with an emphasis on building the island’s resilience to storms, flooding, and other effects of climate change.
Mike also endorsed statehood for Puerto Rico. Mike believes that until Puerto Rico becomes a state, it will continue to lack the tools and resources needed to build a stronger economy and recover from disasters – and Congress will continue sending just enough money to put band-aids on problems, without actually fixing them.
Make your voice heard in 2020
Sign up to join a coalition of supporters to help Mike defeat Donald Trump and get big things done.
Join Us
Mike’s plan
Mike’s economic plan for Puerto Rico will provide the same safety net funding to PR as any other US state, including fair funding for Medicaid, the Earned Income Tax Credit, and Child Tax Credit, in addition to full Social Security benefits. Mike’s plan will ensure expedited release of reconstruction funds and focus on building the island’s capacity to respond to a disaster through increased community engagement, partnerships with key institutions and funding regular disaster preparedness assessments. And, Mike will make the island more resilient to storms, flooding, and other effects of climate change through investments in energy, telecom, public safety, transportation, natural areas, and community-based planning. He’ll help make Puerto Rico’s energy system more sustainable and resilient to the next disaster by speeding up the creation of a decentralized and efficient power system prioritizing distributed renewable energy like solar and wind, microgrids, and energy storage.
Supporting Statehood
Mike believes Puerto Rico should have full statehood. He believes that Puerto Ricans residing on the island should no longer be treated as second-class citizens, and should be afforded all the rights and support provided to all other American citizens. It is time we answered the call for equity and provide equal justice to all Americans.
Debt Management and Government Finance
Puerto Rico continues to be burdened by a federally-controlled debt restructuring process that has imposed draconian cuts to pensions, civil service pay, the university, and municipal governments that are the backbone of public safety and disaster response. Mike’s plan provides for an independent audit, overseen by a representative board, of current debt and recent restructuring proposals, and implements a plan for debt relief based on the results. Mike will appoint members of the oversight board who will put party politics aside and prioritize the interests of the Puerto Rican people. In addition, Mike’s plan will provide the same safety net funding to PR as any other US State. That means fair funding for Medicaid, the Earned Income Tax Credit, and Child Tax Credit, and full Social Security benefits.
Reconstruction and Resilience
Disaster relief for Puerto Rico has been held up for far too long. Only about a third of the $43 billion allocated for Puerto Rico had been spent as of late 2019. The Department of Housing and Urban Development had released almost none of its funding until January of 2020, when it released $8 billion out of $18 billion allocated. When support does arrive, local communities have too little say in the allocation and reconstruction process. Mike will make the reconstruction of Puerto Rico, and the well-being of its 3.2 million citizens , a personal priority as president. He will take steps to empower community leadership and maximize local jobs and business development from reconstruction.
Mike will invest in growth by using reconstruction funds to rebuild the island’s infrastructure and economy and increase Puerto Rico’s resilience to the impacts of climate change.
According to the Global Climate Risk Index 2020, Puerto Rico is the place in the world that has been hardest hit by climate change over the last twenty years. Mike will expedite the release of reconstruction funds, waive requirements for local match if it slows reconstruction down, and help Puerto Rico secure more federal funds to rebuild housing, infrastructure and the electric grid, including from the national infrastructure investment plan Mike is proposing and from his All-In Economy plan.
Clean Energy and Puerto Rico’s Utilities
The current utility restructuring process is not moving far enough toward strong and independent regulation, a modern decentralized grid, or renewable resources, and relying on raising already-high electric rates. High electricity costs already weigh on families and businesses and recent earthquake damage could force a revisiting of the utility’s debt. Mike’s plan will support Puerto Rican efforts to update the current utility, including by revisiting debt relief and strengthening the independence of the regulator.
Download Mike’s Plan for Puerto Rico
Download
Mike’s Record
As mayor of New York City, and through his philanthropic work, Mike has been a longtime supporter of Puerto Rico. He has made several trips to the island, worked closely with the Puerto Rican community in New York, and been a vocal advocate for the rights of Puerto Ricans as American citizens.
Trump
By contrast, President Trump, who has described himself as the “savior of Puerto Rico,” has taken every opportunity to avoid helping the U.S. territory when it needed it most. He personally intervened in budget talks to cut Medicaid funding to Puerto Rico. He delayed, and in some cases refused, sending disaster relief funds to Puerto Rico on multiple occasions – in response to Hurricane Irma, Hurricane Maria, and the earthquakes in 2020 – hiding behind the claim that the elected leadership of Puerto Rico was corrupt. Trump also promised during the 2016 campaign that he supported statehood, but in September 2019, he said on a radio interview that statehood was an “absolute no”, citing his running feud with San Juan Mayor Carmen Yulín Cruz. At every turn, the Puerto Rican people have been betrayed by this President.
Learn More About Mikes Plans
