Retirement and Social Security
Social Security benefits fall short for too many Americans and their families. For those currently in the workforce, preparing for retirement is a serious economic challenge. More than 50 million people don’t have a retirement savings plan, such as a 401(k), and those who do often don’t contribute enough or are subjected to high fees. President Trump’s proposed budget cuts to Social Security and Medicare will expose some of our most vulnerable people to homelessness, hunger, and poverty. Mike will guarantee America’s hard working seniors of today and tomorrow the dignity they deserve in retirement.
Help people prepare for retirement through safe, government-backed savings plans
Reform the system so that low-income seniors and others can afford critical services
Mike’s Plan:
Raise Americans out of poverty
Mike will introduce a new minimum benefit in Social Security.
Create a retirement-savings plan that works for all
Mike will help people prepare for retirement by providing a government-backed savings plan that cuts out expensive fees, grows money safely and provides a match for low-income workers.
Improve Medicare
Mike will curb out-of-pocket drug costs and expand Medicare to cover routine vision, dental and hearing check-ups.
Build housing security
Mike will increase housing assistance for low-income seniors and back programs that make it possible for them to live at home for longer.
Protect our most vulnerable people
Mike will develop a federal safety net to guard against the catastrophic costs of long-term care, and he’ll protect seniors from predatory financial advisers.
Download Mike’s Retirement Security Plan
“Americans who have worked for decades deserve the opportunity to retire without facing constant financial pressure. As president, I will strengthen Social Security to allow seniors to do just that.”
Mike Bloomberg
Mike’s Record:
As mayor of New York, Mike expanded rental assistance and tax exemptions to seniors and the disabled. He used new state rules to increase property tax exemptions for low-income senior homeowners and signed a bill allowing seniors to immediately apply for rent subsidies after a drop in income.
Mike also put an emphasis on helping New Yorkers access financial planning services. He launched $aveNYC, which encouraged low- and moderate-income individuals to set aside money from their tax refunds for savings, and launched PACE, a $1.35 million program providing resources to minority, elderly, and immigrant homeowners and others vulnerable to predatory lenders.
