Veterans Employment  Economic Security
Skills and behaviors developed in the military can be valuable assets in the civilian world, yet many veterans struggle to find good jobs and build new lives after serving.
Mike’s solutions bridge the gap between military and civilian work by providing veterans with the skills they need to compete in the civilian world while removing roadblocks to veteran employment.
How Mike Will Get It Done:
Clarify the overlap between related military and civilian jobs
Educate companies about the skills veterans bring to the workforce
Offer credentialing services and support throughout a veteran’s career
Protect veterans from predatory lenders
Help veterans transfer to life outside the military
Collect data to better define veterans’ needs
Keep Up With Mike
Keep Up With Mike!
Mike outlined his plan to ensure that veterans have access to quality jobs and economic security for themselves and their families, as they transition out of active service and into the civilian economy. The plan clears the roadblocks to fulfilling work, by providing tools and support to help veterans re-enter the workforce and gain new skills, while also providing protections against scams and predatory lending practices.
Nearly three million women and men have served our nation over the last decade and more than one million veterans are expected to transition to civilian life in the next five years, with many facing an uncertain economic future. Our veterans are some of the most knowledgeable, well-trained people America has to offer. They return home with hundreds of unique and valuable skills – and many have more management experience and leadership potential than the average CEO. But one third of all veterans are underemployed, largely because employers don’t understand how to apply those skills to roles in their companies.
Mike’s plan builds on his unique experience in both business and government, and his understanding about how to make the connection between veterans and companies. He recognizes that the women and men of our Armed Forces come from every corner of America and all backgrounds and, through their service, have gained skills and experience that can strengthen the American economy and communities. And, he knows how to help companies understand the value veterans bring to the table.
On January 5, 2020 Mike visited San Diego where he toured Fuse, a local business founded by veteran Sumner Lee and spoke to local veterans and military families to announce additional policy focused on helping veterans build businesses.
Mike’s plan
Mike Bloomberg’s plan helps to bridge the gap between military and civilian work by providing new veterans the skills and contacts to compete for truly fulfilling civilian employment, so that the dedication and talent of America’s veterans can further enhance America’s companies and communities. His plan:
Will develop a more sophisticated and accessible repository matching the skills required for a military position with the most common civilian jobs that are related.
Educates companies to better understand the unique skills that veterans bring to the workforce and how to develop them over the course of a career.
Calls for the collection of data and developing systems to better evaluate the needs of veterans in order to inform and prioritize future employment support services.
Offers credentialing services and support throughout a veteran’s entire career.
Removes the expiration date for GI Bill benefits, and provides critical financial literacy support to help protect veterans and their families from scams.
Helps veterans launch their own businesses, providing help with drafting business plans and accessing financing.
Mike’s plan will also develop a national platform, similar to a civilian Reserves, for veterans to join with their compatriots to perform national service, recovering the sense of teamwork and camaraderie many felt in the military.
“President Trump has broken his promise to veterans – he’s done nothing significant to fix what’s broken in the VA, find solutions to the many problems plaguing our vets, or bring people together to help those who’ve served,” said Mike Bloomberg. “As president, I will work every day to repay the debt this country owes our veterans – starting by helping them to succeed in the civilian workforce. Veterans are among the most competent, well-trained people in America, and it’s time for the nation to tap into that limitless potential by helping them find jobs that take advantage of their training, teaching them new skills, and giving them the resources required to start a successful business of their own.”
Learn more about Mike’s policy to address economic and health concerns of military families
One of the most difficult things for veterans to do after serving is coming back to civilian life. Mike Bloomberg knows that ex-service members struggle to find good jobs and build new lives after serving. He’s committed to giving our heroes the tools and support they need to carve out meaningful lives in their communities. They have given us so much and helping them fully come home and find work, it’s the least we can do.
Thomas E. Norman
Founder of Veterans Bridge Home, a Charlotte-based organization that connects veterans and their families, in any state of transition, to communities
Mike’s Record
Mike has a record of supporting veterans and families who have served in the military around the world. As a mayor, businessman, and through his philanthropic work, he has always provided support for veterans as they hang up their uniforms and transition into civilian life. In contrast, despite vowing to support America’s veterans, President Trump has proposed budget cuts, sought to undermine the ACA, and gutted critical nutrition and other programs that negatively impact the lives of veterans and their families. On his third day in office, President Trump signed an order freezing pay for federal workers, which disproportionately affected veterans, who are an essential part of the federal workforce.
In 2006, Mike signed a bill improving the city’s Veterans Advisory Board. The bill included a provision requiring the Mayor and Council Speaker to consider service in military conflicts when appointing new members of the board.
In 2008, Mike signed an Executive Order mandating every city agency appoint a liaison to coordinate with the Mayor’s Office of Veterans Affairs (MOVA).
In 2009, Mike launched Support Our Troops, a city-run service program to support veterans and troops actively serving our country. The program sent care packages to each of the approximately 8,000 New York City residents serving overseas in the United States Armed Forces.
In 2012, Mike launched the Veterans Employment Initiative, part of the city’s Workforce1 job training program, to help veterans find jobs and housing as they returned to civilian life.
In 2013, NYC expanded the Veterans Employment Initiative with a Veterans Entrepreneurship Program. The free entrepreneurship program included courses on business planning, marketing and financing and sought to connect participants with local, veteran-owned business leaders as mentors.
NYC waived civil service exam fees for veterans who sought to take the exams for the NYPD, FDNY and Dept. of Correction and other civil service positions.
Mike signed legislation allowing military experience to count toward job licensing requirements, and linking city veterans’ resources to federal and state opportunities.
As the founder of Bloomberg LP, Mike has placed a premium on bringing veterans into the company and putting their leadership skills to work.
In 2016, Bloomberg Philanthropies helped launch The American Talent Initiative, in partnership with the Aspen Institute’s College Excellence Program and Ithaka S+R. The program works with top colleges and universities to increase access and success for students from low- and moderate-income households. In 2018, ATI member schools began focusing on improving military veterans’ access to high-graduation-rate institutions.
Bloomberg Philanthropies gave a $100,000 grant to the Veterans Education Career Transition Resource Center, or VECTR, to buy lab equipment for a warehouse and distribution technician program. VECTR trains veterans to be truck drivers and learn other skills to enter the industry.
Learn More About Mikes Plans
