Wildfire Resilience
Wildfires are intensifying, causing tens of billions of dollars in economic losses each year and generating a growing amount of carbon emissions. Mike’s solution will reduce the loss of life and property caused by wildfires by 50% within four years by making forests and communities more fire-resistant and firefighting safer and more effective.
How Mike Will Get It Done:
Create the Wildfire Corps, a new skilled fire resilience workforce
Launch a federal government effort to strengthen wildfire resilience
Double federal funding for fire resilience and management
Invest in data and technology to detect and mitigate fires
Keep Up With Mike!
Keep Up With Mike!
As the world adapts to climate change and rising global temperatures, unprecedented disasters are devastating American communities and natural environments. Compared to 1986, wildfires in the western U.S. now break out four times more often, burn more than six times the land area and last almost five times as long. In California, where 1 in 4 people live in a high-risk area, wildfires have killed nearly 150 people, burned 3.75 million acres, and destroyed over 35,000 structures. Wildfire-caused economic losses exceeded $40 billion in 2017 and 2018.
These intensifying wildfires are also a source of carbon emissions and a growing contribution to greenhouse gas emissions from land and agriculture systems. That’s why Mike is prioritizing the fight to prevent wildfires as part of his overall approach to climate action and resilience.
Mike will lead a national effort to address the growing wildfire threat. In partnership with Western states and local officials, his administration will spearhead an ambitious initiative to make forests and communities more fire-resistant, while investing in staffing, data and technology to make firefighting safer and more effective. Mike will set a goal of reducing wildfire-caused loss of life and property by 50% within four years, and launch a comprehensive initiative to strengthen protection against wildfires.
Mike’s Wildfire Resilience Priorities:
Lead a Nationwide Effort to Strengthen the Nation’s Resilience against Wildfires
Robustly Fund a Full-scale Campaign to Bolster Forest Ecosystems and Communities
Invest in the Staff, Data and Technology Needed to Fulfill this Mission at Scale
Make your voice heard in 2020
Join Mike on this issue to help defeat Donald Trump and get big things done.
Join Us
Mike’s plan
Lead a Nationwide Effort to Strengthen the Nation’s Resilience against Wildfires
Responsibility for preventing and fighting fires crosses multiple jurisdictions and interests — federal, state, local, private and tribal. In the West in particular, multiple landowners can be involved between the point where a fire starts and where it causes the most damage. This kind of large-scale action demands strong leadership and coordination. To ensure our country is protected from future harm and is equipped to mitigate future damages, Mike knows that it’s up to the federal government, as the majority landowner of forests in the West, to take the lead. Mike’s plan will:
Make fire resilience a top priority of the U.S. Forest Service, as well as other federal land management agencies. Task the agency with coordinating the development of a far-reaching new plan for firefighting and fire prevention for each Western state.
Increase collaboration among all levels of government, and public and private sectors. The Forest Service will work with other federal partners, local communities, state and local agencies, tribal leaders, environmental groups, private timber companies, rural land owners, utilities and the insurance industry to develop region- or state-specific plans with the goal of reducing life and property loss by half within four years.
Improve community resilience and prevent redlining by the insurance industry. Collaborative fire protection plans will include measures to reduce risk to communities and property, minimize damages in case of fire, and thereby improve the chances of getting or maintaining insurance, so that current homeowners who don’t have alternatives aren’t left without the ability to insure for disasters.
Robustly Fund a Full-scale Campaign to Bolster Forest Ecosystems and Communities
Managing forests to reduce the potential for catastrophic wildfires not only reduces hazards and saves lives, but also creates local jobs in rural communities and improves forest and ecosystem health. Mike’s plan will:
Double federal funding for fire resilience and management to $10 billion and devote half to forest restoration and mitigation efforts. This would increase spending on prevention roughly tenfold, while still raising firefighting budgets. According to the GAO, while federal agencies estimate more than 100 million acres of land they manage are at risk from fire, they were only able to treat 3 million acres in fiscal year 2018. Bigger budgets would fund state-by-state efforts to vastly increase the pace and scale of fire resilience and forest restoration, including in wildland-urban interface areas. The program would include exploring the use of forest resilience bonds that leverage public and private sources of investment to fund fire prevention work.
Increase FEMA’s mitigation budgets and the share of total fire spending made available to communities to strengthen resilience. Making homes and communities more fire-safe would save lives, create jobs, reduce the costs and dangers of firefighting, strengthen insurance networks, and bolster local and regional economies. Fireproofing homes, expanding access roads and defensible spaces, developing evacuation plans, and otherwise strengthening community resilience can save lives, create jobs, reduce the costs and dangers of firefighting, and strengthen insurance networks. One dollar spent on fire mitigation saves more than $3 in costs. Yet currently, the federal government sets aside only 6 cents of every dollar in federal disaster aid to fund pre-disaster mitigation activities.
Endorse Sen. Kamala Harris’s Wildfire Defense Act, and the similar House bill sponsored by Rep. Jared Huffman. The Act would invest $1 billion a year in funding community-based wildfire plans. Also, work with insurance companies to ensure they take account of such plans in assessing community and home resilience, and in order to incentivize good building.
Provide federal loans and grants, including to local utilities, to reduce the risk from downed power lines. Money could be used on strategic plans to reduce the potential for power lines to start fires, including work to maintain corridors, insulate exposed power lines, and install sensors that can quickly identify maintenance and risk-reduction needs, as well as shut off power to damaged lines. Improving line safety would directly address one of the most common causes of wildfires.
Support the development of microgrids in high-risk areas to minimize power outages and enhance communities’ capacity to quickly respond and coordinate in the event of an emergency.
Invest in the Staff, Data and Technology Needed to Fulfill this Mission at Scale
Managing forest land for resilience and prevention, and making communities more fire-resilient, will require employing thousands of people in rural communities. Mike’s plan will:
Create the Wildfire Corps – a new, thousands-strong federal, state, and tribal partnership. The government would train, employ, equip and embed a skilled workforce, prioritizing hiring in rural and forest communities, to lead efforts towards fire resilience; restore healthy forest ecosystems; and, when fires break out, provide enough firefighters to offer communities greatly enhanced wildfire protection.
At the same time, we should deploy the most advanced systems to detect and prevent the spread of fires. Mike will:
Use data and technology to detect and mitigate fires and to improve firefighting techniques.
Partner with state authorities to ensure that the best, most up-to-date fire-risk maps are available.
Deploy the best-available data systems, including satellites, aircraft, artificial intelligence and communications technology to help predict and detect the start and spread of fires and to improve firefighting techniques.
Engage the private sector by providing challenge grants for companies to develop innovative new technologies and open-source data and systems to improve detection and monitoring of fires, as well as communications among first responders.
Download Mike’s Plan for Wildfire Resilience
Download
Mike’s Record
Mike’s plan builds on his long-standing record of fighting climate change and making communities more resilient against climate-related harms:
For the past two decades, Mike has become one of the world’s leading environmentalists through his work to fight the climate crisis through government, business and philanthropic efforts.
As mayor, Mike was committed to making New York City resilient. He implemented PlaNYC, a groundbreaking strategic sustainability plan. Ultimately, he reduced the city’s carbon footprint by 14 percent while increasing park and pedestrian space, undertaking the planting of over 1 million trees, and restoring large swaths of New York City’s waterfront as a “sixth borough.”
Bloomberg’s climate initiatives as mayor led to the cleanest air quality levels in New York City in more than 50 years. Mike’s clean air initiatives were credited with annually preventing 800 deaths and leading to 2,000 fewer lung- and cardiovascular disease-related emergency room visits and hospitalizations.
As a philanthropist, Mike has been committed to helping keep the U.S. on track to meet a global pledge to cut greenhouse-gas emissions. From helping close 302 of the nation’s 530 coal plants, to co-founding America’s Pledge that has galvanized a coalition to continue America’s commitment to the Paris Climate Agreement, Mike has worked tirelessly with cities, states, businesses and NGOs to keep our country moving forward on climate change despite President Trump’s failed attempts to drag us backwards.
Through the Bloomberg Philanthropies American Cities Climate Challenge, Bloomberg partnered with 25 American cities to deepen and accelerate their efforts to tackle climate change and promote a sustainable and resilient future for residents.
The Issue
Rising global temperatures are bringing milder, shorter winters and decreased snow and rainfall, and in turn, longer and drier spring, summer, and fall seasons. The increasingly arid weather for longer parts of the year are prime conditions for wildfires — and national systems and experts predict the fires are only going to get worse, and expand into regions like the South and Midwest.
Wildfires are not only a result of climate change, they are also a source of carbon emissions and a growing contributor to greenhouse gas emissions from land and agriculture systems.
In just the last three years, wildfires have brought record-breaking damage to the U.S. In California, killing nearly 150 people, burning 3.75 million acres, and destroying over 35,000 structures. Wildfire-caused economic losses exceeded $40 billion in 2017 and 2018. Of the 20 most destructive wildfires in California over the last century, 11 have occurred in the last 4 years.
Trump
In keeping with his general dismissal of the climate crisis, Trump has refused to acknowledge the role climate change plays in worsening wildfires.
This November, as California faced another consecutive year of destructive fires, Trump tweeted that poor forest management was to blame for the fires’ intensity — a statement rated false by nonpartisan fact checkers.
At the same time, Trump threatened to cease federal wildfire aid to California.
Under Trump, FEMA aid has decreased: in 2018 following the deadliest fire in California history, FEMA provided over $186 million to help affected communities. Comparatively, after the 2017 Tubbs fire, FEMA aid exceeded $376 million.
Trump’s fiscal 2019 budget called for a decrease of more than 15.5% for the U.S. Forest Service to $5.1 billion.
At the Department of the Interior, Trump proposed cutting the appropriation for wildland fire management by more than 11%, to $482.3 million, with a reduction in staffing by 161.
Trump’s former Secretary of the Interior Ryan Zinke blamed California’s wildfires on “environmental radicals that have prevented us from managing the forests for years.”
Learn More About Mikes Plans
