Women for Mike
Mike Bloomberg is an experienced leader who gets things done on the issues that matter most to women. As an entrepreneur, mayor of New York, and philanthropist, Mike has long supported advancing gender equality, maternal and reproductive health, and women’s economic development both in the U.S. and around the world.
He has a strong record of supporting and empowering women throughout his career — from hiring women to the very top positions in his mayoral administration to supporting women candidates for higher office to instituting an industry-leading 26-weeks of paid family leave at his company.
Mike is committed to furthering an inclusive agenda for women when he gets to the White House. Learn why women across America are standing with Mike.
Join Women for Mike
Women for Mike
At this critical moment for the country and for the Democratic Party, women will be instrumental in selecting the party’s nominee and defeating President Trump in November. When Trump is defeated, it will be because women rose up to say enough.
Mike Cares About the Issues that Matter to Women
Mike Will Fix Health Care
More than 10 million women and 4 million children do not have health insurance in America. It is no secret that the U.S. health care system needs to be more affordable and more efficient. Mike recognizes this is a top concern and will make it a priority to insure more Americans and lower health care costs.
What he’ll do
Defend the Affordable Care Act and protect people with pre-existing conditions
Create a Medicare-like public option run by the federal government but paid for by premiums
Cap health care prices and ban surprise medical bills
Lower prescription drug costs
Focus on covering those currently uninsured, including low-income Americans in states that haven’t expanded Medicaid
What he’s done
Reduced the number of uninsured in New York City by 40%, with a 72% drop in the number of uninsured children
Increased life expectancy for NYC residents by 3 years
Cut teen smoking by 50% and heart disease by 32% in NYC
Mike Will Protect Reproductive Freedom
At some point in her life, nearly every woman will decide whether to have a child, when to have one, with whom, and how. This fundamental right to choose is under attack in Trump’s administration. Mike’s record on such a vital issue is unassailable, and he remains committed to protecting reproductive rights and access.
What he’ll do
Protect the rights established under Roe v. Wade by working with Congress to codify Roe v. Wade
Repeal the Hyde Amendment, which bars federal funding for abortion except to save a woman’s life
Abolish President Trump’s rule that bans Title X organizations from providing abortions and from referring patients to other abortion providers — doing so will expand reproductive health care to 4 million low-income women supported by Title X National Family Planning and nearly 17 million more women who receive Medicaid benefits
Remove barriers that prevent or hinder women from obtaining a legal, safe abortion, including opposing state bans on insurance covering abortions and excessive, restrictive regulations on doctors and reproductive health clinics.
Expand access to affordable birth control.
Appoint judges who respect established legal precedent.
What he’s done
One of the first things Mike did after being elected mayor was ensure all OB-GYN residents were trained in reproductive care.
His administration increased access to emergency contraception, which helped dramatically reduce unwanted pregnancies, particularly among teens.
As a long-time supporter of Planned Parenthood, when pro-life groups pressured the Susan B. Komen charity to cut funds from Planned Parenthood in 2012, Mike immediately stepped in with $250,000 to cover the shortfall.
Partnered with Planned Parenthood Global to expand access to reproductive health care and reduce maternal death in developing countries.
Learn more about Mike’s Policy on Reproductive Freedom
Women’s Rights are Human Rights
Women’s rights are under attack, and so are women themselves. We need a president who will protect the health and rights of all women—not try to undermine them. As president, Mike will do exactly that.
Mike Will Improve Maternal Health
The United States is one of the most dangerous developed countries to give birth, particularly for black women whose chances of dying due to pregnancy-related complications is triple that of white women. We have gone backward in maternal mortality outcomes. While Trump whittles women’s access to vital health services, Mike is committed to improving maternal health outcomes, with a focus on reducing inequalities in communities of color.
What he’ll do
Address racial bias among health care providers by requiring doctors to have training in understanding and countering implicit bias in medical care
Standardize maternal mortality data collection
Boost funding for medical schools at Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs)
What he’s done
New York City’s infant mortality rate fell to historic lows during the Bloomberg administration
Launched the Nurse-Family Partnership model for low-income pregnant moms in 2003, which paired experienced nurses with more than 8,000 low-income, first-time moms to help them care for a newborn
Learn More About Mike’s Maternal Health Policy
Mike Will Fight Climate Change
Climate change threatens Earth, public health, the economy, and society. Science supports it, Trump denies it, Mike is doing something about it. Committed to clean energy, clean air, and clean water, he will restore America’s leadership in defending the planet now and for future generations.
What he’ll do
Immediately rejoin the Paris Agreement and meet the targets science recommends
Slash our greenhouse gas emissions in half by 2030
Strengthen pollution standards for cars and trucks and make electric vehicles more affordable for Americans
Replace remaining U.S. coal plants with clean energy
Stop construction of all proposed gas plants
What he’s done
Served as the UN Secretary General’s Special Envoy for Climate Action
Helped close 50% of the country’s coal-fired power plants
Reduced NYC’s carbon footprint by 14%, expanded solar power, and eliminated dirty-burning heating oil
Planted over 1 million trees in NYC
Learn more about Mike’s Climate Change Policy
Mike Will Increase Gun Safety and Keep Our Families Safe
How many more shootings need to happen before something is truly done? How many more lives cut down, futures denied, families devastated, communities broken? Mike will continue to take on the gun lobby and enact common-sense laws that save lives while protecting 2nd Amendment rights.
What he’ll do
Create an effective national background check system
Protect our children by outlawing assault weapons, banning guns in schools except for law enforcement, and requiring secure storage of firearms
Tackle daily gun violence in the hardest-hit communities
Keep guns out of the wrong hands, including domestic abusers
Hold the gun industry accountable
What he’s done
Helped create Everytown for Gun Safety, which now has 6 million supporters and leads the charge on gun safety nationally
Invested $110 million to elect candidates strong on gun safety in the 2018 midterm elections
Launched groundbreaking undercover investigations to stop illegal gun sales by private sellers
Learn more about Mike’s Gun Safety Policy
Mike Will Create An All-In Economy
Economic growth is not being felt in certain swaths of the country where manufacturing, agriculture, and industry once were steady, stable sources of employment. Mike plans to revive the economies and incomes in areas being left behind by Trump.
What he’ll do
Increase the federal minimum wage to $15 an hour
Create jobs of the future in communities today by funding major RD initiatives in industries like agriculture, manufacturing, and medicine
Enhance the Child Tax Credit and the Earned Income Tax Credit to help families cover critical expenses
Make career education and training a national priority
Invest in rural broadband access
What he’s done
Created more than 450,000 jobs as New York City’s mayor
Built his own company from the ground up, employing nearly 20,000 people globally
Established incubators in NYC that hosted more than 600 startups, which raised more than $100 million in venture funding
Set up Business Solution Centers (one-stop shops) across NYC to help entrepreneurs access capital and navigate government bureaucracy
Increased certifications of minority and women-owned businesses to compete for city contracts, which resulted in NYC awarding more than $3.5 billion in contracts to certified companies
Learn more about Mike’s All-In Economy Agenda
Mike Will Improve Education and College Access
All students deserve access to an education, yet financial realities make this prospect daunting, if not impossible. A family’s balance sheet should never pose an obstacle for students to realize their potential, and Mike will pave ways for affordable quality education.
What he’ll do
Raise teacher pay and make sure all teachers have the training and professional support they need
Set high expectations and close student achievement gaps
Promote innovation in the public-school system
Ensure all K-12 students’ basic needs are met
Increase support for career and technical education and work-based learning
Make America the world leader in college completion
What he’s done
Oversaw 42% increase in graduation rates in NYC public schools, with African American and Latino students making the biggest gains
Doubled NYC’s education budget and gave a 43% raise to teachers
Connected 66,000 high-achieving, low-income high school students to free college counseling, through his national College Point program
Learn more about Mike’s Education Policy
Mike Will Improve the Quality of Child Care and Early Childhood Education
Currently, the United States lags behind other developed countries in investing in child care and early childhood learning. Too many children don’t start formal school until Kindergarten, putting them at a significant disadvantage that follows them throughout their academic careers. Many working families struggle to pay for quality child care—if they can even find it. Mike will address the ways we’re failing our children and make our children a national priority. When they thrive, America will.
What he’ll do
Triple the number of children served by Early Head Start
Make child care more affordable by raising the percentage of families who receive child care subsidies, expanding the Child and Dependent Care Tax Credit, and helping colleges provide child care programs on campus so parents can stay in school
Boost the quality of child care by creating a nationally-recognized credential for early childhood professionals, encouraging professional development for home-based child care providers, providing grants to states that close the salary and benefits gap between pre-K and Kindergarten teachers in low-income areas, and raising the federal minimum to wage to $15/hour.
Guarantee access to full-day preschool for all three- and four-year-olds, so that every child is ready to succeed in kindergarten.
Incentivize cities and states to develop innovative programs that help low-income children bridge any language skills gaps.
Restore grants for states to reach the goal of universal access to pre-k and reward those that boost enrollment of low- to moderate-income students and increase the quality of programs.
What he’s done
Overhauled NYC’s early childhood education programs
Put more than $100 million into the pockets of low-income families via the Child Care Tax Credit.
Signed legislation making it easier for single parents to collect child support.
Mike Will Guarantee Paid Family Leave
The United States is the only country among 41 developed nations that do not require employers to provide new parents with paid leave. Paid family leave contributes to lower infant mortality, better health outcomes, higher workforce participation for women, and longer career service for employees. Trump has paid lip service to paid family leave, but he is essentially talking about a loan program that has employees borrowing from their future child credits.
What he’ll do
Mandate employers to give workers of all genders 12 weeks of paid family leave.
Ensure lower-wage and middle-class earners can afford to take their leave without burdening employers
Protect workers from job loss if they need time off to care for children or loved ones or to deal with serious illness
What he’s done
Instituted a parental leave policy at Bloomberg LP of 26 fully-paid weeks for primary care-givers. This is double the average benefit of communications and finance Industries and 63% more than the average benefits for tech firms and has been recognized as the most generous of any U.S. news organization by about 6 weeks of paid leave.
Read more about Mike’s Paid Family Leave policy
Mike Will Guarantee Pay Equity
Wage discrimination robs women—particularly women of color—of significant amounts over a lifetime of earnings. Consider this: more women are primary breadwinners, yet they are consistently underpaid compared to their male counterparts no matter where they are on the career ladder. More women work in low-wage jobs, and a majority of the lowest-paying jobs offer less than $10/hour. Women who care for children at home are not financially compensated at all. Mike will ensure women receive equal pay for equal work.
What he’ll do
End pay discrimination and ensure women receive equal pay for equal work.
Increase wage transparency and prevent employers from setting salaries based on work history—which negatively impacts women, who are less likely than men to negotiate salaries and/or receive higher wages when they do; this disparity can follow them throughout their careers.
Expand Earned Income Tax Credits to at-home caregivers who are unpaid for caring for children, parents, and other relatives.
Raise the federal minimum wage to $15/hour
Read more about Mike’s Pay Equity Policy
Mike Will Address the Latina Gender Pay Gap
Latinas face a significant income gap. On average, Latinas will make $28,000 less per year than White men – that’s $1.1 Million over a career span. Nobody deserves to make less because of who they are. As president, Mike will get it done.
Mike Will Strengthen Retirement Security
Despite the reality that many Americans are ill-prepared for retirement, Trump has suggested he is open to cutting Social Security, Medicare, and Medicaid. Women are especially vulnerable: they generally have less savings because they leave the labor force temporarily or permanently to have and raise children or to care for aging parents, and they live longer than men. Mike will ensure we take care of our elderly.
What he’s done
Expanded rental assistance and tax exemptions to seniors and the disabled
Increased property tax exemptions for low-income senior homeowners
Launched PACE, which provided resources to elderly, minority, and immigrant homeowners and others vulnerable to predatory lenders
What he’ll do
Offer a public-option retirement savings plan
Introduce a minimum benefit so low-income seniors don’t slip into poverty
Raise benefits in the future in line with a measure of inflation
Enhance Medicare and Medicaid by offering an optional policy that covers vision, dental, and hearing care
Limit out-of-pocket prescription medication costs
Provide a federal safety net for long-term care costs
Improve housing security for the elderly
Develop programs in collaboration with states that deliver support services to those who need long-term care at home
Pilot programs that expand tax credits to cover family caregiving—borne mostly by women—and other unpaid labor.
Read more about Mike’s Retirement  Social Security policy
The Women for Mike National Leadership Council is comprised of more than 100 women who are endorsing Mike for president and are reflective of the breadth of his support across the country. As members of the Women for Mike National Leadership Council, these women will lend their voices to the campaign while activating their networks to support his candidacy in communities across the country.
How to Get Involved
