Quotes
As president, I will lead this country to bring about a bold change in our foreign policy that bends the arc of history away from war and towards peace. That stops wasting our resources, and our lives on regime change wars, and redirects our focus and energy towards peace and prosperity for all people. The time is now to give up the gunboat diplomacy of the past, and instead, work out our differences with communication, negotiations, and goodwill. (Quote)
“We must be the leader that the world desperately needs right now, to ensure the survival of the human race. It is our responsibility, as the most powerful and influential country in the world, to wield that power to be a force for good, and to save the world from the calamity of a nuclear war that we are sleepwalking towards. It must be our mission, to ensure that the 21st century will forever be known as the turning point in human history, that era in which the world’s great powers chose to abandon the path to confrontation and war and agreed to pursue the path of cooperation, diplomacy, and peace.” (Quote)
“I enlisted in the Army National Guard after the terrorist attack on 9/11, served as a soldier for over 16 years and deployed twice to the Middle East. In Congress I have served for over six years on both the Foreign Affairs and the Armed Services Committee. As president I will end these counterproductive and wasteful regime change wars, work to end this new Cold War and nuclear arms race and take the trillions of dollars that we’ve been spending, and invest those resources in serving the needs of the American people - healthcare, education, rebuilding our crumbling infrastructure, protecting our environment. There are many urgent needs here that we need to address and we’ve got to get our priorities straight.” (Quote)
I think it's important, for the sake of our country's national security, to keep the American people safe, and in the pursuit of peace, for our president and commander in chief to have the courage to meet with leaders of other countries — whether they be adversaries or potential adversaries — in order to achieve peace and security.” (Quote)
Legislation
H.Res.411   This resolution declares that if the President initiates wars without prior congressional declarations, such action shall constitute impeachable "high crimes and misdemeanors," which shall cause the House of Representatives to vote articles of impeachment. In addition, the resolution prohibits the President from making the United States a co-belligerent in an ongoing war without a congressional declaration.
H.R.608 Stop Arming Terrorists Act This bill prohibits the use of federal agency funds to provide covered assistance to Al Qaeda, Jabhat Fateh al-Sham, the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), or any individual or group that is affiliated with, associated with, cooperating with, or adherents to such groups; or he government of any country that the Office of the Director of National Intelligence (ODNI) determines has, within the most recent 12 months, provided covered assistance to such a group or individual.
H.R.921 To establish the policy of the United States regarding the no-first-use of nuclear weapons.
H.R.1249 INF Treaty Compliance Act of 2019 l prohibits the Department of Defense from using funds to test, procure, or field any missile that would be prohibited under the Treaty Between the United States of America and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics on the Elimination of Their Intermediate-Range and Shorter-Range Missiles. 
