Quotes
“What does it say about us — the leaders of this country — who dishonor those who put their lives on the line in service to our country, by shipping them off and kicking them out of the country that they have served? It dishonors the service and sacrifice that they, and their families, have made.” (Quote)
“Veterans today are still treated like a number. Veterans who come home are still facing unemployment and homelessness, even though our veterans are coming home highly trained, highly equipped, leaders, experienced in making decisions in the toughest, most high-pressured environments, assets to any organization or business that chooses to hire them. Let’s recognize that as this country, and make it so that our veterans are the first ones that are hired. They recognize that value, that service.” (Quote)
Legislation
H.R. 5131- Access to Care and Treatment (ACT) Now for Veterans Act, which directs the VA to reimburse non-VA medical care providers and helps eligible veterans receive care in a much more timely manner
H.R. 4571 - Fair Access to Insurance for Retired (FAIR) Heroes Act of 2017, which improves access to quality healthcare for disabled veterans.
H.R. 4345 - Veteran Treatment Court Coordination Act of 2017, which would authorize federal funding for veteran treatment courts in Hawai‘i and across the United States
H.R. 918 - Veteran Urgent Access to Mental Healthcare Act, which provides initial mental health assessments and mental healthcare to veterans with an other-than-honorable discharge who have deployed and served in combat zones
H.R. 3775 - Military Sexual Assault Victims Empowerment (SAVE) Act, which gives survivors the option to seek reimbursable care from non-VA/TRICARE medical providers who can best provide the care these victims need
H.R. 3474 - Hire More Heroes Act, which exempts veterans who already receive health insurance through the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA), or reservists covered under TRICARE, from being counted towards the number of employees (50) required by the employer mandate under the Affordable Care Act
