Outsideof the obviously accepted illegality of sex with children, the US government has no business telling any of us what we can or cannot do with our bodies. REGARDING ABORTION RIGHTS, I AM ONE HUNDRED PER CENT PRO-CHOICE.
Abortion is a moral issue, but I do not believe the government of the United States has the right to legislate our private morals.I believe the decision of whether or not to have an abortion lies solely with the pregnant woman, according to the dictates of her conscience and in communion with the God of her understanding. I do not feel the government has an appropriate right to deny or restrict that decision. Expanding a woman’s understanding of her alternatives to termination is a good thing. But eradicating or limiting abortion rights would not decrease their number; it would simply mean that rich women have safe abortions, while poor women go back to risking injury, or even death, in the modern equivalent of back-alley abortions. That, to me, is morally unacceptable. In several states, restrictive measures such as the closing of abortion clinics and forced vaginal probes are currently in play. Planned Parenthood, a sole source of medical care for millions of women, is under attack in various states in an effort to block the availability of reproductive choice.
As your president, I would seek to protect the right of every woman to make her own decisions, in her own way, regarding her reproductive choices. The choice whether or not to terminate a pregnancy is difficult enough without having the government weighing in on the decision.
Therefore, I would vigorously resist any effort to restrict, limit, or diminish the reproductive rights and freedoms granted by Roe v. Wade.
SPECIFICS
The Williamson Administration will protect reproductive rights by:
Appointing federal judges and Supreme Court judges who respect Roe v. Wade, and the Constitutional right to Privacy
Funding Planned Parenthood
Protecting the lives of doctors and staff who perform and assist with abortions
Ensure that women receive proper care and guidance whether they choose to carry a baby to term, or need to exercise their right to choose.
Ensure that insurance companies cover the costs of abortions
Vigorously oppose federal and state legislation designed to shame, harass, punish, or further restrict women exercising their constitutional right to choose.‍
Please enable JavaScript to view the comments powered by Disqus.
Animal Protection
Child Advocacy
Crime Prevention
Criminal Justice
Democracy at Risk
Disability Justice
Education
Environmental Crisis
Food
Foreign Policy
Gun Safety
Health Care
Immigration
LGBTQ Rights
Mass Incarceration
National Security  Peace-Building
National Service
Native American Justice
Plan for U.S. Department of Children and Youth
Plan for U.S. Department of Peace
Racial Reconciliation  Healing
Social Security
The Whole Student Plan K-12
The Anti-Poverty Plan
The Economy
The Reparations Plan
The Whole Health Plan
Veterans
Women’s Rights
All Issues
Updates directly from our team
Lets Create This.
This is about forging a new political possibility in America. It’s about all of us working together to create a rising tide of citizen activism and activation. It’s not just about electing a candidate. Its about you....your power....and your world.
Heading
EXPLORE
My StoryIssuesEventsVideosConnectPressBlogStoreDonate
GET IN TOUCH
Press InquiriesContact Us
ON LOVE AND POWER
PAID FOR BY MARIANNE WILLIAMSON FOR PRESIDENT
Privacy PolicyAccessibility
 
