LGBTQ Rights are a Part of Our Founding Principles
Our Declaration of Independence holds that the inalienable rights of, "Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness," are endowed to ALL humans by their creator at birth. In 2015, marriage equality became the law of the land, yet there is still no federal law explicitly protecting the lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and queer (LGBTQ) communities from discrimination. These communities, therefore, do not enjoy the full breadth of freedoms that this country espouses to guarantee to each and every citizen.This is not only unacceptable; this is in direct violation of our founding principles.Generation after generation, people have fought to rid our country of the “except for’s.” “Except for blacks,” “except for women,” and so forth. Today, we are challenged by the ongoing prejudice that seeks to repudiate the fundamental American dedication to freedom and equality for all. The idea that there should be God-given life, liberty and pursuit of happiness, “except for them,” is a stain on our national character.The ability to pursue a livelihood free from discrimination is a right denied, every day, to members of the LGBTQ communities. It is estimated that roughly 4.5% of the US Population identifies as LGBTQ. But this large percentage of our population still does not have full legal rights and due process rights in many aspects of their life.
The Lack of LGBTQProtections Today
Currently, LGBTQ citizens are not included in the non-discrimination protections provided by the federal Civil Rights Act, and in 30 states, there are no state laws that protect LGBTQ Americans from discrimination..A report from theCenter for American Progressfound that more than half of LGBTQ individuals have experienced discrimination at work, and 68.5% of respondents said that anti-LGBTQ discrimination has impacted their mental health.
Hypothetically, you as an LGBTQ individual can legally enter into a same-sex marriage on Saturday. Then, on Sunday, you can be refused service at your local restaurant, denied partnership rights at your local hospital, fired by your employer for your orientation, and evicted from your home by your landlord - with little or no legal protections or recourse available.According to theHuman Rights Campaign, in 2017, more than 120 bills described as “anti-LGBTQ” were introduced across 30 states, including adoption laws and so-called bathroom bills. A frightening percentage have become law.Every American deserves to live free from fear of discrimination, regardless of who they are and whom they love.
There have been ongoing efforts for over 40 years to change these “except for” legal loopholes. There has been meaningful, bipartisan legislation in the US House ever since 1974, and one version of this reform legislation has been introduced in every Congress since 1994.Unfortunately, through the 115th Congress, ALL these reforms remain unpassed.
A Williamson Presidency Supports the Equality Act
In particular, last Congress’ “Equality Act” (H.R. 2282 and S. 1006), an historic bipartisan legislation, combined many of the issues from most of the past 40 years of effort to ban discrimination against LGBTQ individuals. The Equality Act would provide consistent and explicit non-discrimination protections for LGBTQ people across key areas of life, including employment, housing, credit, education, public spaces and services, federally funded programs, and jury service.The Equality Act would amend existing civil rights law — including the Civil Rights Act of 1964, the Fair Housing Act, the Equal Credit Opportunity Act, the Jury Selection and Services Act, and several laws regarding employment with the federal government — to explicitly include sexual orientation and gender identity as protected characteristics. The legislation also amends the Civil Rights Act of 1964 to prohibit discrimination in public spaces and services and federally funded programs on the basis of sexual orientation.Additionally, the Equality Act would update the public spaces and services covered in current law to include retail stores, services such as banks and legal services, and transportation services. These important updates would strengthen existing protections for everyone.Decades of civil rights history show that civil rights laws are effective in decreasing discrimination because they provide strong federal remedies targeted to specific vulnerable groups. By explicitly including sexual orientation and gender identity in these fundamental laws, LGBTQ people will finally be afforded the exact same protections as other covered characteristics under federal law.In the 115th Congress, the bill was introduced with 241 original cosponsors—the most congressional support that any piece of pro-LGBTQ legislation has received upon introduction. Unfortunately, the bill “died” in committee. As President, I would call on Congress to bring this bill back and into consideration, then passage. I would be waiting to sign it when it came across my desk.
SPECIFICS‍For clarity, these are the principles related to LGBTQ communities that I will fight for as President.
‍The Williamson Adminstration will:
Fight discrimination in health care settings, discriminations which endanger LGBTQ people’s lives through delays, harassment, and humiliation by providers, to being turned away by hospitals, pharmacists, and doctors. All people who need medical care should be able to see their doctor without worrying about being mistreated, harassed, or denied service outright.
Include sexual orientation and gender identity as protected classes under the federal Fair Housing Act, therefore making it illegal to deny any LGBTQ citizen housing. When LGBTQ couples set out to buy or rent a home, they should not confront forms of discrimination that married heterosexual couples do not face. Same-sex couples often must pay more in taxes when they buy or sell a home, or transfer ownership interest, than married heterosexual couples do. In the event of a breakup or death, one partner may find himself or herself out of a home. I believe all these issues must be addressed.
Back the Equality Act (ban discrimination against LGBTQ people at work, in school and elsewhere). This will end practices whereby LGBTQ employees can be unfairly not hired, or fired, or discriminated against in the workplace by private employers on the basis of sexual orientation or gender identity.
Address the laws that in some states enable and embolden businesses and service providers to refuse to serve LGBTQ citizens, compelling LGBTQ individuals to invest additional time, money, and energy to find willing providers (while others simply give up on obtaining the goods or services they need). More insidiously, these laws give LGBTQ individuals a reason to expect discrimination before it even occurs, and to take extra precautions or avoid scenarios where they might face hostility out of self-preservation. This has to be stopped.
Include LGBTQ people in the census.
Appoint an Attorney General who prioritizes prosecuting hate crimes.
Pass the Every Child Deserves a Family Act which prohibits agencies receiving federal money from discriminating against a potential foster or adoptive family on the basis of sexual orientation, gender identity, or marital status.
Restore cuts to global HIV/AIDS programs.
Stop the rollback of transgender health care access.
Lift the transgender military ban.
Ban conversion therapy.
Back legislation to ensure Title IX of the Education Amendment protects LGBTQ students.
Reinstate Obama-era nondiscrimination protections for LGBTQ federal employees and government contractors.
Train police departments in LGBTQ competency.
IN CONCLUSION
The LGBTQ communities are equal citizens of this country and thus deserve full and equal protection under the law. They should be able to pursue a livelihood free from discrimination and have all of the rights afforded under the US Constitution -- not because of their sexual orientation -- but because they are American citizens.
In a Williamson administration, no LGBTQ+ person will feel unsupported by their government. They will live with the absolute knowledge that they and their rights are both honored and protected by the highest authorities in the land.
‍
Child Advocacy
Crime Prevention
Criminal Justice
Democracy at Risk
Disability Justice
Education
Environmental Crisis
Food
Foreign Policy
Gun Safety
Health Care
Immigration
Mass Incarceration
National Security  Peace-Building
National Service
Native American Justice
Plan for U.S. Department of Children and Youth
Plan for U.S. Department of Peace
Racial Reconciliation  Healing
Reproductive Rights
Social Security
The Economy
The Reparations Plan
Veterans
Women’s Rights
All Issues
Updates directly from our team
Lets Create This.
This campaign is about forging a new political possibility in America. It’s about all of us working together to create a rising tide of citizen activism and activation. It’s not just about electing a candidate. Its about you....your power....and your world.
Heading
SIGN UP TO RECEIVE Mobile alerts
EXPLORE
My StoryIssuesEventsVideosConnectPressBlogStoreDonate
GET IN TOUCH
Press InquiriesContact UsVolunteerWork With Us
PAID FOR BY MARIANNE WILLIAMSON FOR PRESIDENT
Privacy PolicyAccessibility
 
