Social Security Should Not Be At Risk
Social Security, signed into law by President Franklin Roosevelt in 1935, was created to insure that our seniors can live in dignity without fear of poverty. Workers pay into a fund during their prime years, then get regular payments back when they stop working.It is useful when understanding a subject, to examine the name of that subject. By providing security to individuals in their later years, the program was designed to provide greater security to society itself. We all benefit from knowing that there is a basic floor of needs met for those in later and less advantaged stages of life.Social Security has worked well for generations to reduce poverty among seniors and the disabled. It is under attack today by Wall Street banks and related financial “service” entities who want to privatize it for no other reason than to tap into another new and huge source of income and bonuses.To that end, opponents of Social Security have claimed over the last few years that it is running out of money soon. It is true that there could be problems with Social Security funding down the line, but they are quite easily solvedby making modest changes, such as raising the cap on income subject to Social Security payroll tax. That simple modification can keep the system solvent indefinitely, without reducing benefits.Under no circumstances should we put Social Security at risk. We need to protect this successful and compassionate program that retiring Americans have relied on for nearly eighty-five years.
SPECIFICS
Consequently, the Williamson Administration will:
Make necessary changes to Social Security (such as raise the cap on income subject to Social Security Payroll Taxes) that will both protect the rights of those who receive it (and who will receive it) and ensure that Social Security does not run out of money.
Resist all efforts to privatize Social Security
Commence a national discussion on how best to go beyond Social Security and find new ways to provide holistic care for our growing elderly population.
‍
Child Advocacy
Crime Prevention
Criminal Justice
Democracy at Risk
Disability Justice
Education
Environmental Crisis
Food
Foreign Policy
Gun Safety
Health Care
Immigration
LGBTQ Rights
Mass Incarceration
National Security  Peace-Building
National Service
Native American Justice
Plan for U.S. Department of Children and Youth
Plan for U.S. Department of Peace
Racial Reconciliation  Healing
Reproductive Rights
The Whole Student Plan K-12
The Anti-Poverty Plan
The Economy
The Reparations Plan
The Whole Health Plan
Veterans
Women’s Rights
All Issues
Updates directly from our team
Lets Create This.
This campaign is about forging a new political possibility in America. It’s about all of us working together to create a rising tide of citizen activism and activation. It’s not just about electing a candidate. Its about you....your power....and your world.
Heading
EXPLORE
My StoryIssuesEventsVideosConnectPressBlogStoreDonate
GET IN TOUCH
Press InquiriesContact UsVolunteerWork With Us
Start a Campaign Circle
PAID FOR BY MARIANNE WILLIAMSON FOR PRESIDENT
Privacy PolicyAccessibility
 
