Re-Balancing Female Power  Influence
One of the most profound shifts of the 21st Century is the emerging power of women. From the #metoo movement to issues of equal pay for equal work, from shattering glass ceilings to dismantling patriarchal economic and social systems, the 21st Century will continue to see a deep rebalancing of male and female power.
As the first woman President of the United States, I would be deeply aware of my pivotal role in ushering in a new era of female leadership. If I am given the authority, I will use the full powers of the presidency to advocate for the things women care about.
In many ways, it is difficult to separate issues of women’s health and pay equity. Women still make, on average, just 80 cents for every dollar earned by men, and this affects every aspect of a woman’s life, including her health and wellbeing.
Our economic system was created by men, for men - and only recently have women been allowed power within that system. The proverbial glass ceiling traditionally kept women out of the market system, and while the situation has certainly improved, it will take years to transform the kind of thinking that still leaves women out of the game.
The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services cites multiple studies that show between 22% and 57% of homeless women are homeless because of violence committed against her.One in three American women are living on the brink of poverty. Women are not only breadwinners in the family, but they are often also the primary caregivers for their children. Consequently, there are few ways to improve families without improving the economic circumstances of women. Furthermore, statistics show us that women care more about the environment, and the earth itself, than most men. Consequently, it is not only supporting women economically but adopting their mindsets of protection of community and planet, that needs to be a priority for any White House, and certainly will be, with mine.
SPECIFICS
The Williamson Administration will support the following policies in order to protect and benefit women:
Reauthorize and fully fund the Violence Against Women Act, and then remove all sunset provisions so that it cannot lapse.
Increase rules, regulations, and oversight to prevent pregnancy-related discrimination.
Require more post-birth leave time for mothers - and fathers. Enact Paid Family and Medical Leave through the FAMILY Act, enabling women to make money while still taking care of family and loved ones.
Pass the Equal Rights Amendment to the Constitution.
Support the EMPOWER Act - Ending the Monopoly of Power Over Workplace Harassment through Education and Reporting Act.
Empower the Justice Department to more thoroughly prevent sexual harassment, discrimination, and rape.
Provide more funding for Headstart and high-quality childcare programs. As the City of New York has provided universal pre-K for its citizens, so must the United States.
Fund and expand welfare food stamp coverage for low-income families and children.
Support reproductive rights. Strengthen all federal efforts to stave off attacks on Roe v. Wade and its basic tenets.
Support equal pay for women.
Increase Social Security benefits, particularly to close the gap between male and female recipients. Raising children is unpaid labor, and women should not be financially penalized for this as we age. The work of building a family is as hard, as significant, and as beneficial to society and economy as is any other form of labor. Social security benefits should reflect this.
The feminine energy is the energy of creation and of protection of the community. By adopting policies to protect women, society simply protects itself.
‍
Child Advocacy
Crime Prevention
Criminal Justice
Democracy at Risk
Disability Justice
Education
Environmental Crisis
Food
Foreign Policy
Gun Safety
Health Care
Immigration
LGBTQ Rights
Mass Incarceration
National Security  Peace-Building
National Service
Native American Justice
Plan for U.S. Department of Children and Youth
Plan for U.S. Department of Peace
Racial Reconciliation  Healing
Reproductive Rights
Social Security
The Whole Student Plan K-12
The Economy
The Reparations Plan
Veterans
All Issues
Updates directly from our team
Lets Create This.
This campaign is about forging a new political possibility in America. It’s about all of us working together to create a rising tide of citizen activism and activation. It’s not just about electing a candidate. Its about you....your power....and your world.
Heading
EXPLORE
My StoryIssuesEventsVideosConnectPressBlogStoreDonate
GET IN TOUCH
Press InquiriesContact UsVolunteerWork With Us
PAID FOR BY MARIANNE WILLIAMSON FOR PRESIDENT
Privacy PolicyAccessibility
 
