Foreign Policy: Amy believes that we need to stand strong — and consistently — with our allies and that we must respect our frontline troops, diplomats and intelligence officers, who are out there every day risking their lives for our country, and deserve better than foreign policy by tweet. She would invest in diplomacy and rebuild the State Department and modernize our military to stay one step ahead of China and Russia, including with serious investments in cybersecurity. Read Amy’s speech at the Council on Foreign Relations on the 5 Rs of her foreign policy agenda: Renewing American leadership, repairing our alliances, rejoining international agreements, responding appropriately to the threats and challenges that come before us, and reasserting American values.
Guns: Gun violence prevention policies are long overdue. Amy supports a package of gun violence policies including instituting universal background checks by closing the gun show loophole and banning bump stocks, high capacity ammunition feeding devices and assault weapons. She is also the author of a proposal that would close what is commonly referred to as the ‘boyfriend loophole’ by preventing people who have abused dating partners from buying or owning firearms. Read Amys gun violence plan here.
Veterans: We make a promise to those who serve in defense of our country to provide them and their families the health care, education and economic opportunities they have earned. As President Amy, will make sure we keep that promise. She will improve veterans’ health care, expand access to education and job training, connect those who served to jobs and economic opportunity, and stand up for our veterans, servicemembers, National Guard and reserve members. Read Amy’s veterans plan here.
Combating Hate and Domestic Terrorism: As President, Amy will make combating domestic terrorism and hate-motivated violence a priority. She will direct the Department of Homeland Security to resume its work tracking right wing extremism, including white nationalism, make lynching a federal hate crime and work with communities to assess how current forms of communication are being used to spread hate and recommend ways to combat threats. Read Amy’s plan to combat hate and domestic terrorism here.
