Senator Klobuchars Plan for Equality for the LGBTQ Community
America is a nation founded on equality for all people and Senator Klobuchar believes that we must never stop fighting to advance that equality for the LGBTQ community. Senator Klobuchar’s record demonstrates that commitment. As the Hennepin County Attorney, she was a leader in taking on hate crimes. In 2000, because of her work, she was invited to the White House to introduce President Bill Clinton when he announced the introduction of the Matthew Shepard hate crimes legislation that covered a wide range of hate crimes including those against gay and lesbian people. When Senator Klobuchar arrived in the Senate, she was one of the votes to finally pass the Matthew Shepard hate crimes bill. She also voted for the repeal of Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell, was a co-sponsor of the bill to repeal the Defense of Marriage Act before the Supreme Court made marriage equality the law of the land, and has long supported legislation like the Employment Non-Discrimination Act and the Equality Act to combat discrimination against the LGBTQ community. And at a time when President Trump is trying to roll back LGBTQ rights, Senator Klobuchar continues to push for LGBTQ equality when it comes to health care, education and civil rights.
As President, Senator Klobuchar will stand up for the LGBTQ community by: 
Improving Access to Health Care
Supporting training for health care workers to provide appropriate and equitable care to LGBTQ patients.
Strengthening protections for medically-necessary transition-related care.
Tackling the skyrocketing cost of prescription drugs like PrEP. Read more about Senator Klobuchar’s plan to reduce the cost of prescription drugs here.  
Prioritizing mental health and investing in suicide prevention programs, including a strong focus on LGBTQ young people. Read more about Senator Klobuchar’s plan to prioritize mental health and combat addiction here. 
Reversing the Trump Administration’s decision to change the Title X program to ban federal funding for health providers like Planned Parenthood, which are an important source of health care for many LGBTQ Americans. 
Banning conversion therapy at the federal level by passing Senator Murray’s Therapeutic Fraud Prevention Act, legislation Senator Klobuchar co-sponsors in the Senate. 
Collecting data to track and address LGBTQ disparities in care.
Improving support and protections for older LGBTQ Americans including by prohibiting discrimination by long-term care facilities. 
Combating the stigma of HIV/AIDS including by launching a review of state and local federal laws and policies criminalizing certain actions by people living with HIV/AIDS. 
Prioritizing research into treatment and cures for HIV/AIDS and making medical research more inclusive of the LGBTQ community. 
Directing the Food and Drug Administration to end all non-medically-based restrictions on blood donations. 
Standing Up for Civil Rights
Passing the Equality Act in year one of her Presidency to take on discrimination against LGBTQ Americans.
Restoring protections for the LGBTQ community when it comes to civil rights, education, and health care.
Creating an office of LGBTQ Antidiscrimination within the White House Domestic Policy Council to coordinate antidiscrimination efforts across federal agencies.
Rejecting efforts to give federal protections to those discriminating against LGBTQ people.
Recognizing third gender markers on the federal level in line with the decision of federal courts.
Banning the so-called gay and transgender panic defense that excuses violent behavior against members of the LGBTQ community by passing Senator Markey’s Gay and Trans Panic Defense Prohibition Act, legislation Senator Klobuchar co-sponsors in the Senate. 
Fully funding programs to help state and local authorities investigate and prosecute hate crimes under the Matthew Shepard and James Byrd, Jr., Hate Crimes Prevention Act.
Prioritizing efforts within the Department of Justice to address violence against transgender women, including by investigating these cases as hate crimes. 
Updating the Prison Rape Elimination Act and fully enforcing the law to better protect LGBTQ people who are incarcerated. 
Advocating for Children, Families, Employment and Economic Inclusivity
Combating discrimination against foster and adoptive families by passing the Every Child Deserves a Family Act, legislation Senator Klobuchar co-sponsors in the Senate. 
Strengthening civil rights protections for LGBTQ students to prevent bullying, discrimination and harassment. 
Promoting LGBTQ-inclusive sex education programs. 
Lifting the ban preventing qualified transgender people from serving in the military.
Expediting the process for service members who were discharged for no other reason than their sexual orientation to correct negative discharges in order to reflect their honorable service. 
Strengthening protections against workplace harassment for LGBTQ workers by working with Congress to pass the BE HEARD in the Workplace Act, which is a comprehensive approach to addressing workplace sexual harassment and assault by promoting transparency and accountability, strengthening legal remedies, and making sure all workers are protected. Senator Klobuchar co-sponsors this bill in the Senate. 
Expanding efforts to reduce LGBTQ homelessness. Read more about Senator Klobuchar’s Housing First plan here. 
Supporting LGBTQ Rights Abroad
Supporting the President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief, which has saved millions of lives in sub-Saharan Africa and around the world and changed the course of the HIV/AIDS pandemic.
Standing up for LGBTQ rights abroad, including by immediately filling the role of Special Envoy on LGBTQ issues and fully funding the State Department’s efforts to work with LGBTQ organizations to advocate for human rights around the world. 
Restoring asylum for the victims of gender-based violence after the Trump Administration adopted a legal interpretation that could lead to rejecting most LGBTQ asylum-seekers.
Reversing the Trump Administration policy change to no longer issue family visas to same-sex partners of foreign diplomats or employees of international organizations who work in the United States.
Ending Trump Administration policies that make it harder for children born outside of the United States to a U.S. citizen parent in a same-sex relationship to qualify for U.S. citizenship. 
In addition, Senator Klobuchar has laid out a plan for her first 100 days that includes executive action she can take immediately to protect and strengthen the rights of the LGBTQ community:
Lift the ban preventing qualified transgender people from serving in the military and restore protections for the LGBTQ community. Senator Klobuchar will direct the Department of Defense to lift the ban on military service by transgender people. She will reverse the harmful anti-LGBTQ administrative actions taken by the Trump Administration when it comes to education, health care and civil rights, and she will work to pass the Equality Act in year one of her presidency.
Protect LGBTQ people from government-sanctioned discrimination. Senator Klobuchar will stop efforts to give federal protections to those discriminating against LGBTQ people. She will end all efforts by the Department of Justice that argue that transgender people do not have protections under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act.
Prioritize LGBTQ antidiscrimination policies across the federal government to address homelessness, suicide and access to life-saving drugs. Senator Klobuchar will expand efforts to reduce LGBTQ homelessness, address LGBTQ suicide rates, and increase access to PrEP. She will create an office of LGBTQ Antidiscrimination within the White House Domestic Policy Council to coordinate these efforts across federal agencies.
Collect data to address LGBTQ disparities. Senator Klobuchar will ensure all federal data collection efforts accurately reflect the needs of LGBTQ communities including reinstating LGBTQ data in the foster care system and Older American Act that the Trump Administration has tried to stop collecting.
Restore asylum for the victims of gender-based violence. Senator Klobuchar will overturn former Attorney General Jeff Sessions’s opinion in Matter of A-B and restore protections for immigrant victims of domestic violence seeking asylum in the United States.
Take on domestic terrorism. Senator Klobuchar will prioritize combating domestic terrorism and empower law enforcement to investigate and prosecute perpetrators of hate-motivated violence, including against minorities, people of color, immigrants, and the LGBTQ community. She will direct the Department of Homeland Security to resume its work tracking right wing extremism, including white nationalism. And she will require federal law enforcement agencies to regularly assess the threat of domestic terrorism and increase training and resources for state and local law enforcement to address it.
Reinstate visas for same-sex partners of foreign diplomats. Senator Klobuchar will reverse the Trump Administration policy change to no longer issue family visas to same-sex partners of foreign diplomats or employees of international organizations who work in the United States.
Restore the White House Office of National AIDS Policy. Senator Klobuchar will restore the White House Office of National AIDS Policy that has been effectively shuttered under the Trump Administration and support the work of the Presidential Advisory Council on HIV/AIDS, which President Trump temporarily left vacant.
