This page includes resources to support your efforts on behalf of Bennet for America.
About Michael
Download PDF
Michael is running for president to build opportunity for every American and restore integrity to our government. He has demonstrated an ambitious vision for the future and the strength and experience to beat Trump in 2020.
Michael represents the State of Colorado in the Senate, but he has not spent a lifetime in politics. He turned around failing businesses in the private sector and improved outcomes for kids as superintendent of the Denver Public Schools. He’s relentlessly focused on building opportunity for the next generation. He’s viewed as a thoughtful and pragmatic voice and has won historically tough elections without compromising on his beliefs, core values, or positions on difficult issues. He lives in Denver with his wife, Susan Daggett, and their three daughters: Caroline, Halina, and Anne.
Michael has more experience winning tough races than anyone else running for president. He won elections in 2010 and 2016 — both difficult cycles for Democrats — in a state that is a third Republican, a third Independent, and a third Democrat. In 2010, he prevailed in a general election that saw Democrats lose races up and down the ballot as the Tea Party wave swept America. During that race, Michael said he would be willing to lose his seat over voting for the Affordable Care Act; rather than shy away from the issue, he held town halls in Colorado’s most conservative counties, defending his progressive position. In 2016, Michael won in areas of Colorado that Trump won, including Pueblo County, which he carried by nearly 10 percentage points. He won reelection with more votes than anyone in Colorado history.
Learn more about Michael by watching the “Just the Truth” digital ad series, which was launched to share with voters his personal story, experiences in leadership and service, and motivations underlying his run for president. 
The Real Deal Agenda
The Real Deal is Michaels comprehensive vision to make lasting progress for families and workers across the country. In contrast to the agendas of other candidates, The Real Deal is progressive, paid for, and widely popular among the American people. This is the political and policy blueprint that should guide our priorities for the next 20 years.
It represents a turning away from the politics of empty promises and can’t-do rhetoric, and instead imagines a world where we accomplish 15 key policies and transform the lives of millions of Americans.
The Real Deal is an agenda that Democrats up and down the ballot — in blue, purple, and red states — can run on to defeat Donald Trump, take back the Senate, and expand control in the House. 
It would cost about $6 trillion over the next decade — less than one-fifth of the cost of Medicare for All alone — and unlike other candidates, it is not paid for with a major middle-class tax hike.
Learn more at MichaelBennet.com/RealDeal.
Press Highlights
Download PDF
Recent Clips:
Union Leader: Bennet Picks up Key Supporters (1/24/20)
WMUR: Bennet Spins Viral Tweet Into New TV Ad (1/22/20)
Nashua Telegraph: Town Hall Puts Bennet in Home Stretch (1/27/20)
Denver Post: Michael Bennet: Rebuttal to Impeachment Case Has Been “the President’s Middle Finger” (1/23/20)
WMUR: Michael Bennet Redoubles NH Commitment, to Spend All Campaign Time in Granite State Through Primary (1/26/20)
Watch Michael on MSNBC with Ali Velshi
Watch Michael on CNN with Poppy Harlow
Watch Michael on CNN with Wolf Blitzer and Jake Tapper
Watch Michael on MSNBC with Ali Velshi
Watch Michael on Hardball with Chris Matthews
Top Highlights:
The Economist: Elizabeth Warren’s Ideas Get Noticed. Michael Bennet’s Are Better. (September 2019)
Boston Globe: Michael Bennet’s Pragmatic Case for President (September 2019)
Washington Post: To Defeat Trump, Democrats Should Nominate Bennet (July 2019)
The Atlantic: The Democrat Who Wants to Stop the Rage (March 2019)
Des Moines Register Editorial Board: Michael Bennet Pounds Some Truth Into the Campaign (August 2019)
San Francisco Chronicle: If Joe Biden’s Campaign Implodes, Michael Bennet Is Ready (September 2019) 
Washington Post: One Democrat Has the Nerve to Take on Bernie Sanders (May 2019)
Read More:
Washington Post: Michael Bennet Knows What’s Wrong With America (May 2019)
Washington Post: Michael Bennet is Sick of Watching Democrats Lose (May 2019)
Washington Post: Democrats Debate How Far Left is Too Far Left as They Prepare to Take on Trump (July 2019)
Washington Post: A Conversation with Michael Bennet (July 2019)
Washington Post: Why Im Running for President (July 2019)
Yahoo! News: Michael Bennet, Colorado’s Good-Natured Progressive, Makes His 2020 Case in Iowa (February 2019)
Cleveland Plain Dealer: In the Crowded 2020 Democratic Landscape  Sen. Michael Bennet Stands Out (June 2019)
The New Yorker: Senator Michael Bennet on His Bid for the Presidency (August 2019)
The Atlantic: Bennet Steals the Moment From Harris and Biden on School Segregation (July 2019)
The Atlantic: Mad as Hell (August 2019)
USA Today: Leading Democrats Today Will Not Win in Iowa (September 2019)
Watch  Listen:
Ezra Klein Show Podcast: How Mitch McConnell Convinced Michael Bennet to Run for President (June 2019)
Recode Decode: Why Senator Michael Bennet Believes He Can Win The Presidency In 2020 (July 2019)
Slate: How Michael Bennet Wants to Fix America (July 2019)
MSNBC’s The Rachel Maddow Show: Moving the Nation Forward (June 2019)
MSNBC: Its Time for New Leadership (June 2019)
CNN: Bennet Doubles Down on Trump After Democratic Debate (August 2019)
CBS News’ Face the Nation: Americans “Sick and Tired” of Trumps  Reality TV Show (August 2019)
WBUR: Why Sen. Michael Bennet Is Running For President: Washington Wont Fix Itself (August 2019)
PBS NewsHour: Bennet Says “It’s Time for a New Generation of Leadership” (June 2019)
MSNBC’s The Last Word with Lawrence O’Donnell: Fighting Child Poverty (June 2019)
Stay Tuned with Preet: The Opposite of Trump? (August 2019)
MSNBC’s Morning Joe: Bennet on Economic Inequality (June 2019)
The Daily Show with Trevor Noah: Michael Bennet on Education  the Senate (August 2019)
ABC’s The View: Bennet Discusses Health Care, Education, and Immigration (July 2019)
92nd Street Y: Michael Bennet in Conversation with Author Casey Gerald (September 2019)
Larry Lessig’s Another Way: Day One Campaign Finance Reform  Unclogging a Corrupt Congress (October 2019)
Texas Tribune Festival: Michael Bennet  Lawrence O’Donnell (September 2019)
What People Are Saying About Michael
Download PDF (one pager)  |  Download PDF (full)
“Obama insisted that there were gifted Democratic politicians out there, but that many were new to the scene. He mentioned … Senator Michael Bennet, of Colorado.”
James Carville: “The best way to beat Donald Trump is to show you’re not him in any way, shape or form. Senator Bennet has less in common with Donald Trump than any human being in the United States when it comes to worldview, priorities, and demeanor. Senator Bennet is the opposite of Trump and is the best Democrat to take him on. And Senator Bennet would be the best President of the United States, which is why I endorsed his campaign.”
Former Senator Gary Hart: “Michael Bennet has the intelligence, experience, and judgment to put our nation back on track at home and abroad. He has more than his share of intellectual resources and a lifetime of public service. Michael Bennet is the soul of integrity and will restore dignity and respect so badly lacking in the White House today and restore our nation’s honor in the world.”
Former Colorado Governor Bill Ritter: “Michael has the ideas, character, and unrelenting focus on ending politics as usual that we need in our next president. I appointed Michael to the Senate because of his ability to bring people together to get things done—especially in trying times—and I know he will bring this same strength to the presidency. Michael knows how to build the broad coalition we will need to win purple states like ours and others in 2020. Michael’s record in the Senate shows us the kind of leader he will be in the White House: one with the intellect, humility, and ability to make progress on our most pressing challenges.”
Former Colorado Governor John Hickenlooper: “I’ve known Michael Bennet for more than two decades, and I’m proud to support him. He is a master of synthesizing complex issues and coming up with creative solutions that transcend the partisanship of our day.”
Des Moines Register Editorial Board: “Iowa caucusgoers … would be well-served to give Bennet more attention.  He offers a much-needed reality check on the promises candidates are offering and what it will take to accomplish meaningful change.”
New Hampshire Union Leader: “Another moderate contending for attention is U.S. Sen. Michael Bennet of Colorado, who continues to impress here in New Hampshire….”
The Economist: “Mr Bennet’s ideas are a foil to [Elizabeth Warren’s]. They are just as rigorous and technocratic, but more rooted in pragmatism.” He is “the candidate perhaps most intellectually capable of challenging the party’s leftward creep.”
Boston Globes Scot Lehigh: “It’s not enough simply to win the presidency, [Bennet] stresses. Democrats need to hold the House and retake the Senate. That means creating a broad coalition for change, one that extends beyond the deep blue states. That’s a tough truth from this smart, thoughtful political pragmatist — a candidate who has yet to get the attention he deserves.”
Former Ohio Governor Richard Celeste: “Michael is about as grounded an individual who has devoted a life to public service as I have ever met. He’s real. He’s authentic. He’s passionate. He’s curious, a student of history and is a total contrast to the guy who is there now.”
Former South Carolina Democratic Party Chair and former DNC Chairman Don Fowler: “Even though many of us are meeting you for the first time, I think it’s clear you know all you need to know to be president of the United States.”
Colorado Attorney General Phil Weiser: “As a constituent, colleague, and friend, I’ve seen first-hand how Colorado values inform everything Michael does. His public service is driven by a deep, progressive commitment to equity, justice, and the Rule of Law. That’s what Americans want in the White House after four years of failed leadership – and that’s why Michael has my vote.”
Washington Post’s George Will: “Bennet is too serious a person to be content in today’s Senate, and if Democrats are as serious as they say they are about defeating Donald Trump, Bennet should be their nominee.”
MSNBC’s Joe Scarborough: “[T]ake a closer look at Bennet’s résumé and skill set, and it becomes clear that he could be the answer to the question that every Democrat — from the far left to the methodical middle — is asking: Who can win this race? … In many ways, Bennet melds the best of the last two Democrats to win the White House, Bill Clinton and Barack Obama.”
Endorsements
National
Democratic Strategist James Carville
Former General Chair of the DNC, Colorado Governor  Los Angeles Unified School District Superintendent Roy Romer
Former Presidential Candidate  Colorado Senator Gary Hart
New Hampshire
State Representative and Assistant Majority Floor Leader Michael Cahill
State Representative Marjorie Smith
State Representative Bob Backus
State Representative Joyce Fulweiler
State Representative Dave Luneau
State Representative Sherry Dutzy
Bow Selectman Harry Judd
Paul LeBlanc (Southern New Hampshire University President)
Lucy Hodder (UNH School of Law Professor  Former Legal Counsel to then-Governor Maggie Hassan)
Maria Law (Partner, Rath  Pignatelli)
Sheridan Brown (Attorney  Conservation Activist)
Rick Loeffler (Small Business Owner)
Pete Spanos (Local Activist)
Meryl Levin (Executive Director of Mill Falls Charter School)
Will Kanteres (Small Business Owner  Manchester Community Leader)
Claudia Damon (Former Concord School Board Chair)
David Ruedig (Former Concord School Board Chair)
Mary Ruedig (Local Activist)
Kyri Claflin (Retired Professor  Voting Rights Activist)
Mike Steinberg (CEO  Founder, Relyco)
Kathie Latham (Nashua Public School Teacher)
Molly Shaheen (Designer  Entrepreneur)
Nancy Vawter (Small Business Owner)
Dan Calegari (Manchester Community Leader)
Bruce Fox (Family Farmer)
Iowa
Patrick White (Former Johnson County Attorney)
Henry Marquard (Local Activist)
Gary Guthrie (Farmer)
Kesho Scott (Grinnell College Professor  Local Activist)
Jeff Harris (Writer and Local Activist)
Jerome Michels (Small Business Owner  Local Activist)
Robert Bibbens (Local Activist)
Carol Ann Bartles (Bennet County Chair  Local Activist)
Brett Haddy (Bennet County Chair  Local Activist)
Sally Forrester (Bennet County Chair  Local Activist)
Brandi Helms (Bennet County Chair  Local Activist)
Kim Shadur (Bennet County Chair  Local Activist)
Jim Bernard (Bennet County Chair  Local Activist)
Mary Bernard (Bennet County Chair and Local Activist)
Craig Shadur (Doctor  Local Activist)
Lynn Marie Barbier (Local Activist)
Colorado
Former Governor John Hickenlooper
Former Governor Bill Ritter
Attorney General Phil Weiser
Denver Mayor Michael Hancock
Former Denver Mayor Wellington Webb
State Representative Matt Gray
State Representative Dylan Roberts
Recent Email Updates
January 27, 2020
January 21, 2020
January 13, 2020
January 6, 2020
December 31, 2019
