Delaney believes that rules-based trade is a critical component of United States foreign policy.
U.S. leadership in the world is not only important for diplomacy and our national security but for the economy. Trade opens up new markets for American businesses. At any international meeting, it is important to not only have representatives from the diplomatic and military communities but also have an economic advisor to ensure all decisions are holistic.
As president, Delaney would seek to reenter the Trans-Pacific Partnership and reject the isolationist views of the Trump Administration and those running in the Democratic presidential primary. Delaney was one of the few Democrats who supported President Obamas efforts to pass the TPP and is the only presidential candidate who supports reentering TPP. Rejecting isolationist trade policies and engaging in the world is good for the economy and good geopolitically. The Democratic party has an opportunity to stand up for good trade deals with important environmental and labor protections.
TPP is a powerful response to China’s economic and geopolitical misconduct. It would have allowed the U.S. to help set the rules for a block of countries that make up 40% of the global economy. Withdrawing from the trade deal ceded the region to Chinese economic dominance. Delaney understands that the U.S. needs to engage in multilateral agreements to best counter China. Trump’s go it alone ideology is no winning trade strategy. His bilateral trade wars and reliance of tariffs has damaged the country as bankruptcies in farm areas have skyrocketed and rural economies have suffered. Poorly designed and illegal tariffs are bad for workers, bad for businesses and bad for consumers. We should instead be embracing fair, rules-based trade that benefits American workers and businesses in addition to strengthening U.S. leadership in the world. To protect those who are impacted by trade, we have an obligation to step in and make sure that we are taking care of those communities by investing in them, in their infrastructure, in their schools, and in their entrepreneurs. As Delaney says, we have to think globally, but we have to invest locally.
