Issues
American People  Nation Building
Are you sick of seeing your hard-earned tax dollars being wasted on wars that have nothing to do with us?
Are you tired of the needs of people overseas are being prioritized when so many people in America are badly in need?
I agree Americans are not being prioritized. I therefore pledge to be your voice in Washington. I will put an end to the failed policy of being the world’s police and nation builder, redirecting the trillions of dollars wasted on wasteful wars and weapons. I will ensure these funds will be redirected back to us at home and spent on building a cleaner, safer, healthier America.
Tulsi's record:
Quotes
“I look at each issue on its own merit. Partisan politics don't matter. It only matters whether something is good for the American people or not. That’s why many have a hard time figuring me out. I don’t play their games. I don’t fit in their boxes.” (Link)
“I love our country. It’s why I decided to enlist after 9/11, why I serve in Congress, and why I’m offering to serve as your commander in chief — to protect you, our Constitution, our freedom.” (Link)
“The presence of PAC money in our political system has put corporations and special interests ahead of the people who elect us to serve.” (Link)
I know what patriotism is  I’ve known many great patriots throughout my life. Trump is not a patriot. As president, I will bring this spirit of real patriotism to the White House, serving the interests of all Americans, not just the rich and powerful. (Link)
Watch
Tulsi Gabbard: Stand up against Big Pharma / insurance companies
We must stand up, and fight for the soul of our country. Stand up against bought and paid-for politicians, who kowtow to special interests, selling their votes to the highest bidder Instead of draining the swamp, our president has turned it into a cesspool of corruption. We must stand up against big pharma and insurance companies who extort those who are sick, who put their profits above the health of our people. We must fight to ensure that every American gets the quality healthcare they need, through Medicare for All.
Legislation
H.R.1500 Consumers First Act: To require the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau to meet its statutory purpose.
H.R.582 Raise the Wage Act To provide for increases in the Federal minimum wage, and for other purposes.
H.R.1942 Ending Mass Collection of Americans' Phone Records Act To repeal the authority to access on an ongoing basis business records for foreign intelligence and international terrorism investigations, and for other purposes.
H.R.2176  Return to Prudent Banking Act of 2019 To repeal certain provisions of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act and revive the separation between commercial banking and the securities business, in the manner provided in the Banking Act of 1933, the so-called “Glass-Steagall Act”
Watch
To respect you — that is my personal commitment
It is my personal commitment to you that I will always treat you, and all my fellow Americans, with respect. Everyone deserves respect no matter their race, religion, or political views or affiliation. Inclusion, unity—these will be the operating principles of my administration.
