Issues
Civil Liberties  Protection
Do you believe that you have a right to privacy?
Are you worried that our constitutional freedoms are slowly being chipped away?
I’m concerned that our civil liberties are under attack. Our right to privacy, guaranteed by the 4th Amendment, is threatened by overreaching intelligence agencies and big tech monopolies that falsely invoke national security interests to take away our civil liberties. Our right to free speech is jeopardized by the ever-increasing power of mainstream media corporations.
Tulsi's record:
Quotes
We have to remember that the first casualty of war is often our constitutional rights, our civil liberties, and privacy. We saw how in the previous Cold War, suspicion and government surveillance of American civilians increased. We remember the House Committee on Unamerican Activities. We got a glimpse of how our society changed when we look back to that McCarthy era, and we see the invasive activities of the FBI at that time. And then we look today with technology, the broad reach of surveillance in our country, that risk is even greater now. (link)
A strong national defense and the protection of our civil liberties are equally important and compatible. We can strike the necessary balance between freedom and security by reforming our surveillance practices and directing the resources we have toward proven methods of eliminating threats to the safety and security of the American people. (link) 
We must stand up against the big Wall Street banks who gamble with our money and our future. Stand up against overreaching intelligence agencies and big tech companies who take away our civil liberties, privacy, and freedoms in the name of national security and corporate greed. (link)
Watch
Stealing our money, privacy, and freedom
We must stand up against the big Wall Street banks who gamble with our money and our future. Stand up against overreaching intelligence agencies and big tech companies who take away our civil liberties, privacy, and freedoms in the name of national security and corporate greed.
Legislation
H.R. 3178 Strengthening Privacy, Oversight, and Transparency (SPOT) Act to expand the functions of the Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Board (PCLOB)
H.R. 699 Email Privacy Act
Electronic Communications Privacy Amendments Act to make much needed and long overdue updates our online privacy law
H.R 4124 USA RIGHTS amendment to protect the privacy of Americans’ communications and end warrantless backdoor searches of Americans' communications
H.R.2588 Preventing Unconstitutional Collection Act  to permanently codify protections on Americans’ privacy
