Issues
Criminal Justice  Reform
Do you agree there is one law for the wealthy and another for the poor in America?
Does the fact we reward millionaires and billionaires who steal and cheat taxes make you furious?
Me too. Our criminal justice system is not just and allows wealthy crooks to profiteer whilst poor criminal go to jail. This can no longer stand and I will ensure fairness and the same rule of law for all, so we have a criminal justice system that finally works the same for everyone.
Tulsi's record:
Quotes
“Criminal justice reform is a bipartisan issue. We can bring down costs and improve outcomes by implementing alternatives to incarceration.” (link) 
"Our outdated policies on marijuana are turning everyday Americans into criminals, tearing apart families, and wasting huge amounts of taxpayer dollars to arrest, prosecute, and incarcerate people for non-violent marijuana charges." (link)
We must stand up against for-profit, private prisons and a criminal justice system that favors the rich and powerful and punishes the poor, locking up people who smoke marijuana and ignoring corps like Purdue Pharma responsible for thousands of opioid-related deaths. (link)
As president I’ll end the failed war on drugs, legalize marijuana, end cash bail, and ban private prisons and bring about real criminal justice reform. (link)
 
Watch
Little 'crooks' go to jail. Big crooks make billions.
We must stand up against for-profit, private prisons and a criminal justice system that favors the rich and powerful and punishes the poor, locking up people who smoke marijuana and ignoring corps like Purdue Pharma responsible for thousands of opioid-related deaths.
Legislation
H.R. 5682 FIRST STEP Act  reduce the prison population by strengthening evidence-based, rehabilitative programs for those who are incarcerated. 
H.R.1588 Ending Federal Marijuana Prohibition Act of 2019 amends the Controlled Substances Act to provide that the Act's regulatory controls and administrative, civil, and criminal penalties do not apply to with respect to marijuana. It removes marijuana and tetrahydrocannabinols from schedule I
H.R.1587 Marijuana Data Collection Act of 2019 study on the effects of State legalized marijuana programs
H.R. 459 Trafficking Survivors Relief Act To provide for the vacating of certain convictions and expungement of certain arrests of victims of human trafficking. 
