Issues
Elections
Are you concerned about gerrymandering and institutional attempts to dismantle democracy?
Do you feel worried about foreign governments interfering in our elections – even as the current administration denies this is happening?
As your president, I will make it a priority to guarantee a government of, by, and for the people by strengthening campaign finance laws, protecting voting rights for every American, and ensuring our elections are protected against all forms of interference. My Securing America’s Elections Act ensures either a paper ballot or voter-verified paper backup, so no foreign countries or individuals can skew results. If we lose faith in our elections, democracy crumbles.
Tulsi's record:
Quotes
“This is the huge vulnerability that threatens our next election, that so far, unfortunately, has not been addressed. The fact that there are still many states in this country who don’t have paper ballots or any kind of auditable paper trail; to make sure that whether it’s another country, or an individual rogue actor, that comes in and tries to manipulate our votes, tries to change our votes to change the outcome of this election; our system is vulnerable to those hacks and attacks today.
So I’ve introduced legislation in Congress called The Securing America’s Elections Act. Very simply put, it solves this problem by making sure that every single state either uses paper ballots, or has a voter-verified paper backup so that we in this country have an auditable paper trail to protect our democracy.” (Quote)
Legislation
H.R.1 — For the People Act of 2019 to expand voter registration and voting access, makes Election Day a federal holiday, and limits removing voters from voter rolls.
H.R.51 — Washington, D.C. Admission Act to provide for the admission of the State of Washington, D.C. into the Union.
H.R.727 — Puerto Rico Statehood Admission Process Act to provide for a vote on Puerto Rico's admission into the Union as a state.
H.R.712 — John Tanner Fairness and Independence in Redistricting Act to prevent gerrymandering
H.R.540 — Presidential Tax Disclosure Act of 2017 to require the disclosure of the Federal income tax returns of the President.
