Issues
Healthcare for all
Are you terrified about the rising costs of your medicine and worried you won’t be able to afford it for you or your family?
Are you pretty happy with your healthcare plan and worried you might lose it under a new administration?
Do you think healthcare in America rewards those who make bad health choices?
As President, I will make healthcare my upmost priority, and ensure all Americans have an inclusive, affordable healthcare plan that will be there for them when they and their family most need it. I support a single-payer system that will allow individuals to access private insurance if they choose. I will also incentivize good health choices and lifestyles for a healthier, wealthier nation!
Tulsi's record:
Quotes
“Too many people in this country are getting sick without the care that they need. As president, I will work to ensure all Americans have quality healthcare incentivized to increase health and prevent and heal disease.” (Link)
“No one should be forced to choose between putting food on the table and paying for life-saving medication. But that’s exactly what’s happening to millions of Americans as a result of Big Pharma’s chokehold on Medicare. They’ve managed to buy access into Congress, barring the government from negotiating cheaper prices for consumers, so they can continue to price-gouge those trying to buy life-saving medication and rake in profits at the expense of the American people.” (Link)
“If you look at other countries in the world who have universal health care, every one of them has some form of a role for private insurance.” (Link)
Watch
Tulsi Gabbard: I support Medicare For All and I want to tell you why
As President and Commander-in-Chief, I will end the wasteful counterproductive regime-change wars, and reinvest those trillions of dollars in the needs of the American people.
 Legislation
Tulsi is a co-sponsor of H.R.1384 - Medicare for All Act of 2019, which would provide universal healthcare to all Americans
H.R.4442 CONNECT for Health Act to promote cost savings and quality care under the Medicare program through the use of telehealth and remote patient monitoring services
H.R.465  Prescription Drug Price Relief Act of 2019 To significantly lower prescription drug prices for patients in the United States by ending government-granted monopolies for manufacturers who charge drug prices that are higher than the median prices at which the drugs are available in other countries.
H.R.448 Medicare Drug Price Negotiation Act To amend title XVIII of the Social Security Act to provide for the negotiation of lower covered part D drug prices on behalf of Medicare beneficiaries
H.R. 676 - Expanded  Improved Medicare for All Act
H.R.447 — Affordable and Safe Prescription Drug Importation Act
Watch
We should be talking about our objective
You’re talking about one bill vs. another bill. Really what we should be talking about is our objective: making sure every single American is able to get the healthcare that they need. I believe Medicare for all is the way to do that.
