Issues
Human Rights  Abortion
Does the very real possibility of Roe v Wade being overturned terrify you?
Are you sick of women’s bodies being used as pawns so politicians can score cheap political points at the expense of their freedom and safety?
I say yes to those questions, and am wholly committed to abortion remaining safe, legal and rare. We must commit to defending a woman’s right to choose. I also support sensible codifying of Roe v Wade preventing third-trimester abortion except when there are grave or life-threatening health consequences for the mother.
Tulsi's record:
Quotes:
"This is often one of the most difficult decisions that a woman will ever have to make, and it's unfortunate to see how in this country it has for so long been used as a divisive political weapon."
"I agree with Hillary Clinton on one thing, disagree with her on many others, but when she said abortion should be safe, legal, and rare, I think she's correct. We see how the consequences of laws that you're referring to can often lead to a dangerous place, as we've seen them as they're passed in other countries, where a woman who has a miscarriage past that six weeks could be imprisoned because abortion would be illegal at that point."
"I do, however, think that there should be some restrictions in place. I support codifying Roe v. Wade while making sure that, during the third trimester, abortion is not an option unless the life or severe health consequences of a woman are at risk."
"Title X grants support family planning and preventive health services to millions of low-income, uninsured, and underinsured Americans each year, including more than 18,000 people in Hawaiʻi. This resolution would limit access to healthcare and weaken important Title X family planning programs nationwide. No matter what state you live in, every American should be able to receive the same access to health care and critical preventative health services."
Rep. Tulsi Gabbard has received 100% legislative scores from Planned Parenthood and NARAL for her votes to protect a woman's right to choose, women's health access, family planning programs, and more.
