Issues
Veterans Care
Are you or a member of your family disillusioned by how you are being treated by this administration?
Are you a veteran struggling to pay bills, afford healthcare or afford a good standard of living?
Are you serving and worried about leaders who send you into wasteful and unnecessary wars?
It is our nation’s responsibility to ensure that our veterans receive the care, services, and benefits they’ve earned and deserve. Taking care of our brothers and sisters in uniform who have selflessly served our country must be a priority for Congress and our country. To honor our veterans, military service members, and their families for their service to our great country, it is my personal commitment to never send our troops into harms’ way unless absolutely necessary.
Tulsi's record:
Quotes:
“Memorial Day is a time to remember: war must only be waged as a very last resort to keep the American people safe. As Commander-in-Chief, I will honor our troops who’ve sacrificed their lives for our country by working to prevent unnecessary costly war.”
“What does it say about us — the leaders of this country — who dishonor those who put their lives on the line in service to our country, by shipping them off and kicking them out of the country that they have served? It dishonors the service and sacrifice that they, and their families, have made.”
“Veterans today are still treated like a number. Veterans who come home are still facing unemployment and homelessness, even though our veterans are coming home highly trained, highly equipped, leaders, experienced in making decisions in the toughest, most high-pressured environments, assets to any organization or business that chooses to hire them. Let’s recognize that as this country, and make it so that our veterans are the first ones that are hired. They recognize that value, that service.”
Watch
Take care of our veterans
On this day and every day, let us all pledge — as Americans, as patriots, as those who love our country — to honor our men and women in uniform by making sure that no veteran is left behind, that they’re always taken care of.
Legislation
H.R. 5131- Access to Care and Treatment (ACT) Now for Veterans Act, which directs the VA to reimburse non-VA medical care providers and helps eligible veterans receive care in a much more timely manner
H.R. 4571 - Fair Access to Insurance for Retired (FAIR) Heroes Act of 2017, which improves access to quality healthcare for disabled veterans.
H.R. 4345 - Veteran Treatment Court Coordination Act of 2017, which would authorize federal funding for veteran treatment courts in Hawai‘i and across the United States
H.R. 918 - Veteran Urgent Access to Mental Healthcare Act, which provides initial mental health assessments and mental healthcare to veterans with an other-than-honorable discharge who have deployed and served in combat zones
H.R. 3775 - Military Sexual Assault Victims Empowerment (SAVE) Act, which gives survivors the option to seek reimbursable care from non-VA/TRICARE medical providers who can best provide the care these victims need
H.R. 3474 - Hire More Heroes Act, which exempts veterans who already receive health insurance through the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA), or reservists covered under TRICARE, from being counted towards the number of employees (50) required by the employer mandate under the Affordable Care Act
Watch
Rep Tulsi Gabbard: Honoring Veterans, need to go beyond lip-service to action
Tulsi Gabbard's full speech from Memorial Day, May 25th, 2014.
