As published on Medium on March 27th, 2019:
For generations, Americas family farmers have passed down a tradition of hard work and independence. Todays family farmers share those same core values, but the economics are more and more tenuous. Last year, farmers gotless than 15 centsof every dollar that Americans spent on food  the lowest amount since the Department of Agriculture began tracking that figure in 1993.
Today a farmer can work hard, do everything right  even get great weather  and still not make it. Its not because farmers today are any less resilient, enterprising, or committed than their parents and grandparents were.Its because bad decisions in Washington have consistently favored the interests of multinational corporations and big business lobbyists over the interests of family farmers.
Farmers are caught in a vise, but the squeeze on family farms isnt inevitable. We can make better policy choices  and we can begin by leveling the playing field for Americas family farmers.
Tackling Consolidation
To start, we mustaddress consolidation in the agriculture sector, which is leaving family farmers with fewer choices, thinner margins, and less independence.
Federal regulators have allowed multinational companies to crush competition and seize control over key markets. Over the last few decades, giant agribusinesses have grown bigger and bigger. Theyve merged horizontally, like Dow-Dupont and Syngenta-ChemChina. And theyve expanded vertically.
Add your name if you agree
We need big, structural change in our agriculture systemand we can begin by leveling the playing field for Americas family farmers.
Tyson, for example, controlsjust about every aspectof bringing chicken to market  feed, slaughter, trucking  everything except owning the farms themselves. Chicken farmers have gotten locked into a contract farming system in which they take on huge risks  loading up on debts to build and upgrade facilities  while remaining wholly dependent on Tyson for everything from receiving chicks to buying feed to selling the grown broilers.
The result of mergers and expansions is immense market power. The top four meat processing companies have53%market share. The three big chicken companies have90%market share. The two biggest seed companies, Monsanto and DuPont, had71%of the corn seed market in 2015  before Monsanto merged with Bayer and DuPont merged with Dow. According toconservative estimates, the newly merged Bayer-Monsanto by itself will control more than 37 percent of the U.S. vegetable seed market overall, and will control more than half of the market for some vegetables.
Mergers mean that farmers havefewer and fewer choicesfor buying and selling, while vertical integration has meant that big agribusinesses face less competition throughout the chain and thus capture more and more of the profits.The result is that farmers are getting a record-low amount of every dollar Americans spend on food, food pricesarent going down, and agribusiness CEOs and other corporate executives are raking it in. The CEO of the Chinese group that ownsSmithfield a massive meat processing company  made $291 million in 2017 alone.
I will tackle consolidation in the agriculture and farming sector head on and break the stranglehold a handful of companies have over the market. Heres how:
First,I will appoint trustbusters to review  and reverse  anti-competitive mergers, including the recent Bayer-Monsanto merger that should never have been approved.I opposed this mergerfrom the start and wasdeeply disappointedto see the Trump Administration approve it earlier this year. l will appoint regulators at the Federal Trade Commission and the Department of Justice who are serious about using the tools they have to produce competitive markets and who are committed to reviewing recent mergers in the agriculture sector and breaking up companies where mergers have reduced competition.
Second,my team will be committed to breaking up big agribusinesses that have become vertically integrated and that control more and more of the market. The Department of Justice has not revised its guidelines on vertical mergersin 35 years. And in that time, we have seen merger after merger linking together every aspect of the chain in farming. We do not want to see other sectors come to resemble thechickensector. My administration will bring vertical integration cases to break up integrated agribusinesses.
Consolidation in agriculture is just part of a broader trend of consolidation that has hurt family farmers. Consolidation in the transportation sector has made it harder for farmers todeliver their goodsand harder for rural areas tocompete economically. Consolidation in the banking sector has hurtcommunity banksand made it more difficult for small businesses and farms toget loans. Consolidation in the healthcare sector hascutoff many rural communities from high-quality and accessible care. My administration will prioritize competition and reverse these trends.
But it all starts with attacking consolidation in the agriculture sector head on.We must give family farmers more options and more bargaining power in the marketplace so they can build more economic security.
Un-Rigging the Rules
Consolidation is choking family farms, but theres a whole lot of other ways in which big business has rigged the rules in their favor and against family farmers. I will fight to change those rules.
For example,many farmersare forced to rely on authorized agents to repair their equipment. Companies have built diagnostic software into the equipment that prevents repairs without a code from an authorized agent. That leads to higher prices and costly delays.
Thats ridiculous. Farmers should be able to repair their own equipment or choose between multiple repair shops. Thats whyI strongly support a national right-to-repair lawthat empowers farmers to repair their equipment without going to an authorized agent.The national right-to-repair law should require manufacturers of farm equipment to make diagnostic tools, manuals, and other repair-related resources available to any individual or business, not just their own dealerships and authorized agents. This will not only allow individuals to fix their own equipment  reducing delays  but it will also create competition among dealers and independent repair shops, bringing down prices overall.
The federal governments administration ofcheckoff programsis also rigged against family farmers. Producers of certain commodities, including beef, pork, chicken, eggs, and corn, are required to pay a portion of their sales into the federal checkoff program, which is used to fund national advertising campaigns. But checkoff programs have also been used tosqueeze outcompetition, like when the Egg Board began a campaign against a small mayonnaise company. The Boards that oversee the funds have also mismanaged them and used them tofund lobbyingcampaigns that benefit large agribusinesses.
We need to reform the checkoff programs to root out corruption.I support legislation that will make the checkoff program voluntary and ensure that Boards cannot engage in anti-competitive practices or lobby the government.
Finally, contract chicken farming has alreadysqueezedfarmers to the breaking point. To stop the spread of that practice,I believe we should prohibit abusive contract farming in the livestock sector.Our farmers deserve better.
Advancing the Interests of American Farmers
Washington has also bowed to powerful foreign interests instead of standing up for American farmers. Congressrepealedmandatory country-of-origin labeling for beef and pork in 2015 after aseriesof World Trade Organization challenges from Canada and Mexico, and it hasnt established a new rule to protect American farmers. The result is that beef and pork can begiven a US origin labelif it is processed in the United States  even if the animals are not born and raised here. This misleads consumers looking for American-grown meat and undermines American beef and pork producers.
Thats whyI will push hard for new country-of-origin rules for beef and pork  and use the trade tools available to me as President to push Canada and Mexico to accept them.These new rules will not only be good for consumers because they promote transparency, but good for independent American farmers, who are otherwise undercut by global agribusinesses passing off foreign beef and pork as American.
We also must stop foreign governments and companies from buying up American farmland. Foreign companies and countries like China and Saudi Arabia already own 25 million acres of American farmland. Thats about thesize of Virginia. Andone in fourAmerican hogs has a Chinese owner. Thatjeopardizesour food security, which threatens our national security too.
Iowa has the right idea. It passed alawprohibiting foreign individuals or entities from purchasing farmland for the purpose of farming.I support a national version of that law, and as President, will use all available tools to restrict foreign ownership of American agriculture companies and farmland.And Im committed to stronger beneficial ownership laws so that foreign purchasers cant set up fake American buyers to get around these restrictions.
Making Washington Work for Family Farmers
There are a lot of issues we must tackle to help rural America: everything from broadband internet and public school funding to water quality and climate change. But promoting competition and leveling the playing field is an important step.
More than a century ago, during the Gilded Age, prairie populists joined together to fight for farmers during a time of massive economic transformation. They understood that working on the farm was honorable work that deserved to be recognized just as much as other occupations.
In his famous Cross of Gold speech, William Jennings Bryansaid: The farmer who goes forth in the morning and toils all day, begins in the spring and toils all summer, and by the application of brain and muscles to the natural resources of this country creates wealth, is as much a businessman as the man who goes upon the Board of Trade and bets upon the price of grain.
Like Bryan, I will fight for farmers  for this broader class of businessman.I want Washington to work for family farmers again, not just for the agribusiness executives pocketing multi-million dollar bonuses or the Wall Street traders sitting at their desks speculating on the price of commodities.I want family farmers to be fairly rewarded for their hard work. That is how we build an economy that works for everyone.
