As published on Medium on June 21st, 2019:
Last month Caliburn International  a for-profit company whose subsidiary operates Homestead, the largest detention center for unaccompanied migrant children hired John Kelly, Trumps former chief of staff. Caliburn has profited directly off of the Trump administrations inhumane immigration policies  while children atHomesteadare reportedly kept in unsanitary, prison-like conditions, often for months. Now John Kelly is cashing in, too.
Rep. Pramila Jayapal and I havedemanded answers. But this is just the latest example of private prison companies wringing billions out of federal taxpayers. Ive beenafterthese companies to come clean about their practices and human rightsabuses. Every answer just raises more questions.
We didnt get here by chance. Washington works hand-in-hand with private prison companies, who spendmillionson lobbyists, campaign contributions, and revolving-doorhires all to turn our criminal and immigration policies into ones that prioritize making them rich instead of keeping us safe.From 2000 to 2016, the private prison population grew five times as quickly as the overall prison population. And the profiteers multiplied, too: today, nearly4,000corporations make money off mass incarceration.
President Obamatook stepsto lower the incarceration rate and wind down private prisons, but these companies got their biggest break yet when Donald Trump landed in the White House. With Trump, private prison companies saw their chance to run the same playbook for our immigration system. Theypoured moneyinto lobbying for alternatives to ICE detention centers. And boy, did it pay off. Private detention centers have made millions implementing Trumps cruel immigration policies, as the number of detained childrenquintupledin just a single year. Today73%of detained immigrants are held in private detention facilities.
The companies running prisons and detention centers regularlysacrificesafety to boost their bottom line. Private facilities havehigher ratesof assaults than federal prisons. Theyviolatefederal rules by putting incarcerated people into solitary confinement to fit more bodies in the building. They imposeforced laboron immigrants just to make a buck. Multiple detainees have committedsuicide. And now, under Trump, babies are getting sick anddyingfrom their detention centers.
Add your name if you agree
Its time to ban private prisons and detention centers, and stop profit-driven cruelty against incarcerated people.
The government has also stood silently by while private contractors providing services in both public and private centers come up with extortive schemes to make millions off of the backs of incarcerated people.Prison phone companieschargeas much as $25 for a 15-minute call, forcing families intodebtjust to stay connected to loved ones. Commissary contractorsmark upprices, and companiescoercedetainees to work for as little as a dollar a day just to afford basic necessities like toothpaste.
While contractors getting paid taxpayer dollars cut corners to maximize margins, the government has turned a blind eye. Food companies make millions but servebug-infestedfood to save cash. An investigation into a prison transport company that allowed at least five deaths and a sexual assault to occur under their watch has gonenowhere.
And today, the exploitation doesnt end when individuals emerge from prison or detention. Current lawpushesmoney into the hands of for-profit supervision companies, many of which are run by the same private prison corporations. These companies get rich by making people just getting out of prison  often with huge debts  payoutrageousfees for monitoring and supervision services like ankle monitors. Some have gone so far as to threaten individuals with reincarceration.
This is exploitation, plain and simple. Our criminal and immigration systems aretearing apartcommunities of color anddevastatingthe poor, including children.Women especially women of color  are particularly saddled with the financial burden. We need significant reform in both criminal justice and in immigration, to end mass incarceration and all of the unnecessary, cruel, and punitive forms of immigration detention that have taken root in the Trump Administration.
The first step is to end this private profiteering off cruelty.
The government has a basic responsibility to keep the people in its care safe  not to use their punishment as an opportunity for profit. Thats why today, Im proposing my plan to root out once and for all the profit incentives perverting our criminal and immigration systems.
Help our campaign keep fighting.
Were counting on grassroots donors to make this campaign possible.
If youve saved your information with ActBlue Express, your donation will go through immediately.
$10
$25
$50
$100
$250
Other
Heres what Ill do:
Ban private prisons and detention facilities.There should be no place in America for profiting off putting more people behind bars or in detention. Thats why I will shut down the use of federal private detention facilities by ending all contracts that the Bureau of Prisons, ICE, and the U.S. Marshals Service have with private detention providers. And I will extend these bans to states and localities by conditioning their receipt of federal public safety funding on their use of public facilities.
Stop contractors from charging service fees for essential services.
Companies shouldnt be able to treat incarcerated individuals as captive profit centers. We should prohibit contractors from charging incarcerated and detained people for basic services they need, like phone calls, bank transfers, and healthcare. Ill also keep contractors from imposing exploitative price markups on other services they provide, likecommissaryorpackageservices. And Ill prohibit companies from charging for re-entry, supervision, and probation services, too  because no one should have to pay for their own incarceration, whether its inside a facility or outside of one.
Hold contractors accountable by expanding oversight, transparency and enforcement.Its time to shine sunlight on the black box of private services that receive taxpayer dollars. Ill close the ridiculous FOIAloopholethat lets private prison subcontractors operate in the shadows. I will put in place an independent Prison Conditions Monitor within the Department of Justices Office of the Inspector General. The Monitor will keep contractors from cutting corners to make a quick buck by setting enforceable quality standards, regularly auditing and investigating contractors, and terminating their contracts if they fall short. Ill direct the Department of Justice to prosecute companies that blatantly violate the law. And Ill make sure companies are held accountable no matter whos in the White House by allowing people to bring a lawsuit against abusive contractors who violate their rights.
Washington hands billions over to corporations profiting off of inhumane detention and incarceration policies while ignoring the families that are destroyed in the process. We need to call that out for what it is: corruption. Incarcerating and detaining millions for profit doesnt keep us safe. Its time to do better.
