Latest Announcements
End Wall Street’s Stranglehold on Our Economy: For decades, Washington has lived by a simple rule: If it’s good for Wall Street, it’s good for the economy. But for a long time now, Wall Street’s success hasn’t helped the broader economy – it’s come at the expense of the rest of the economy. My plan shuts down the Wall Street giveaways and reins in the financial industry so that it stops sucking money out of the rest of the economy.
A Fair and Welcoming Immigration System: Immigrants are our neighbors and our friends. But an immigration system that can't tell the difference between a terrorist and a little girl is badly broken. That’s why today I’m announcing my plan for immigration reform -- to create a rules-based system that protects our security, grows our economy, and reflects our values.
Accelerating the Transition to Clean Energy: Climate change is real, it’s man-made, and our government needs to take bold action and use all the tools available to combat it before it’s too late. Building on some of my earlier plans to address climate change, my new plan attacks it by using the power of public markets to accelerate the adoption of clean energy.
Valuing the Work of Women of Color: Our economy should be working just as hard for women of color as women of color work for our economy and their families, but for decades, the government has helped perpetuate the systemic discrimination that has denied women of color fair pay and equal opportunities. That’s why I have a new plan: a set of executive actions I will take on day one of the Warren Administration to boost wages for women of color and open up new pathways to the leadership positions they deserve.
Revitalizing Diplomacy: A 21st Century Foreign Service: American security and prosperity depend on robust diplomacy, but Donald Trump has declared war on our State Department through a toxic combination of malice and neglect. I have a plan to rebuild the State Department by doubling the size of the foreign service and recruiting and retaining a bold, diverse, and professional 21st century diplomatic corps. I’m also making a commitment to end the corrupt practice of selling cushy diplomatic posts to wealthy donors. I won’t give ambassadorial posts to wealthy donors or bundlers -- and I’m calling on everyone running for President to do the same.
My Plan to Strengthen Our Democracy: It’s time to make voting easy and convenient, stop racist voter suppression, and secure our elections. My plan creates uniform federal rules to make voting easy for everyone - no registration problems, no purges, no difficulties voting, and no gerrymandering - and we’ll have federal funding to make sure our elections are secure from hacking.
Ending Private Prisons and Exploitation for Profit: Washington hands billions over to private prison and detention companies that profit off of inhumane detention and incarceration policies. That stops now. My plan will root out the profit interests standing in the way of real reform by banning privately-owned facilities and preventing companies from exploiting those caught in our criminal and immigration systems.
Leveling the Playing Field for Entrepreneurs: Generations of government discrimination have denied Black and other minority families opportunities to build wealth, making it harder for them to start a successful business and holding back our economy. My new plan provides $7 billion in funding to help level the playing field, and support 100,000 small businesses and more than a million jobs.
The New American Economic Patriotism: For decades, we’ve let giant corporations run our economy even though they have no loyalty or allegiance to America. Not on my watch. I will use all the tools of government to defend and create good American jobs.
Elizabeth’s Green Manufacturing Plan: By investing $2 trillion in American research and American manufacturing of clean energy technology, we can lead the global effort to combat climate change, boost our economy, and create more than a million good jobs here at home.
Elizabeth's Plan to Make Sure That No President is Above the Law: Impeachment isn’t supposed to be the only way that a President can be held accountable for committing a crime. Congress should make it clear that Presidents can be indicted for criminal activity, including obstruction of justice. And when I’m President, I’ll appoint Justice Department officials who will reverse flawed policies so no President is shielded from criminal accountability.
Congressional Action to Protect Choice: Our democracy should not be held hostage by right-wing courts, and women should not have to hope that Brett Kavanaugh and Donald Trump's Supreme Court will respect the law. Congress should pass new federal laws that protect access to reproductive care from right-wing ideologues in the states. Federal laws that ensure real access to birth control and abortion care for all women. Federal laws that will stand no matter what the Supreme Court does.
It’s Time to Reduce Corporate Influence at the Pentagon: The revolving door between defense lobbyists, Congress, and the Pentagon tilts countless decisions away from legitimate national security interests and toward the desires of giant defense contractors. It’s past time to cut our bloated defense budget – and to get serious about cutting defense spending, we need to reduce corporate influence. Americans deserve to know that our military is making decisions with only one thing in mind: their safety. That's why I'm introducing my plan to slam shut the revolving door and curb the influence of giant defense contractors on the Pentagon.
National Security  Climate Change: Climate change is real, it is worsening by the day, and it is undermining our military readiness. But instead of meeting this threat head-on, Washington is ignoring it – and making it worse. I have a plan to make the U.S. military more resilient to climate change, and to leverage its huge energy footprint as part of our climate solution. My energy and climate resiliency plan will improve our service members’ readiness and safety, all while achieving cost savings for American taxpayers.
Tackling the Opioid Crisis Head On: Every day, 130 Americans die from an opioid overdose. This is a public health crisis – and we need to start treating it like one. That's why Congressman Elijah Cummings and I are rolling out the CARE Act, a comprehensive plan that invests $100 billion over the next ten years in states and communities that are on the frontlines of the epidemic - to provide prevention, treatment, and recovery services for those who need it most.
Elizabeth's Plan to Provide Debt Relief for Puerto Rico: After Hurricanes Irma and Maria devastated Puerto Rico, one of the biggest constraints holding back the island's recovery has been its debt. If Puerto Rico were a big company or an American city, it could file for bankruptcy, but because of its unique status, those legal options aren’t available. That’s why I have a plan to provide comprehensive debt relief to Puerto Rico so it can rebuild and thrive.
Addressing Our Maternal Mortality Epidemic: We are facing a maternal mortality crisis in America. And for Black moms, it's an epidemic. One major reason? Racism. It's time to hold health systems accountable for preventable failures and demand change – because women's lives depend on it.
Elizabeth’s Plan to Improve Our Military Housing: Our military families have been raising the alarm about their living conditions for years. This stops now. I have a plan to improve our military housing, protect families from abuse, and hold private developers accountable for the promises they make to those who serve our country.
Cancellation of Student Loan Debt and Universal Free Public College: We should treat higher education like our public school system – free and accessible to all Americans. That’s why I’m calling for something truly transformational – the cancellation of up to $50,000 in student loan debt for 42 million Americans and free universal college for everyone.
Elizabeth's Plan for Public Lands: I’m making a promise. On the first day of a Warren administration, I will sign a moratorium so that there is no more drilling on public lands, and I will set a goal of providing 10% of our overall electricity generation from renewable sources. Climate change is here, it is real, and we should make our public lands part of the solution.
Real Corporate Profits Tax: Year after year, some of the biggest corporations in the country make huge profits, but pay zero federal corporate income taxes on those profits. That isn’t right. My Real Corporate Profits Tax will raise over a trillion dollars and make sure the biggest corporations pay their fair share.
Corporate Executive Accountability Act: Our justice system should ensure that if you cheat working Americans, you’ll go to jail. It’s time to reform our laws to make sure that corporate executives are held accountable for overseeing massive scams.
Leveling the Playing Field for America's Family Farmers: Today, a farmer can work hard, do everything right, and still not make it. My plan gives family farmers a fair shot by tackling consolidation, un-rigging the rules that favor big agribusiness, and standing up for America’s farmers against foreign interests.
It's Time to Get Rid of the Electoral College: Presidential candidates should have to ask every American in every part of the country for their vote. We can make that happen by abolishing the Electoral College and replacing it with a national popular vote.
Elizabeth's Housing Plan for America: Every American deserves a safe and affordable place to live. My plan makes a historic investment in housing that would bring down rents by 10%, create 1.5 million new jobs, and begin closing the racial wealth gap.
Here's How We Can Break Up Big Tech: America’s biggest tech companies are controlling more and more of our digital lives and using their size and power to make it harder for the next tech entrepreneur with the next big idea to compete. It’s time to break up the biggest tech companies to restore competition – and make sure these corporations don’t get so powerful that they undermine our democracy.
Elizabeth's Plan for Universal Child Care: We’re the wealthiest country on the planet – high-quality child care and early education shouldn’t be a privilege that’s only for the rich. I’m fighting to make high-quality child care from birth to school age free for millions of families and affordable for all.
The Ultra-Millionaire Tax: I’m proposing something brand new – a tax on the wealth of the richest Americans. My Ultra-Millionaire Tax asks the richest 0.1% of Americans to pay their fair share, raising nearly $3 trillion that we can use to rebuild the middle class.
End Washington Corruption
Washington works great for the wealthy and the well-connected, but it isn’t working for anyone else. Companies and wealthy individuals spend billions every year to influence Congress and federal agencies to put their interests ahead of the public interest. This is deliberate, and we need to call this what it is—corruption, plain and simple. That’s why Elizabeth has proposed the most ambitious set of anti-corruption reforms since Watergate to fundamentally change the way Washington does business.
We will start by ending lobbying as we know it by closing loopholes so everyone who lobbies must register, shining sunlight on their activities, banning foreign governments from hiring Washington lobbyists, and shutting down the ability of lobbyists to move freely in and out of government jobs.
We will also shut the revolving door between Wall Street and Washington and permanently ban Senators and Congressmen from trading stocks in office and from becoming lobbyists when they retire – not for one year or two years, but for life. We will make the justices of the Supreme Court follow a code of ethics and strengthen the code of conduct for all judges to make sure everyone gets a fair shake in our courts. And we will force every candidate for federal office to put their tax returns online.
Together, these sweeping, structural changes will end the dominance of money in Washington, taking power away from the rich and powerful and putting it back where it belongs – with the American people themselves.
Rebuild the Middle Class
After decades of largely flat wages and exploding household costs, millions of families can barely breathe. For generations, people of color have been shut out of their chance to build wealth. It’s time for big, structural changes to put economic power back in the hands of the American people.
That means putting power back in the hands of workers and unions. It also means transforming large American companies by letting their workers elect at least 40% of the company’s board members to give them a powerful voice in decisions about wages and outsourcing. And it means a new era of strong antitrust enforcement so giant corporations can’t stifle competition, depress wages, and drive up the cost of everything from beef to Internet access.
As the wealthiest nation in the history of the world, we can make investments that create economic opportunity, address rural neglect, and a legacy of racial discrimination–if we stop handing out giant tax giveaways to rich people and giant corporations and start asking the people who have gained the most from our country to pay their fair share.
That includes an Ultra-Millionaire Tax on America’s 75,000 richest families to produce trillions that can be used to build an economy that works for everyone, including universal childcare, student loan debt relief, and down payments on a Green New Deal and Medicare for All. And we can make a historic investment in housing that would bring down rents by 10% across America and create 1.5 million new jobs.
Strengthen our Democracy
Our democracy faces serious threats at home and abroad. Strengthening it will require dramatic changes. That starts with a constitutional amendment to protect the right of every American citizen to vote and to have that vote counted. But it’s just the beginning.
Politicians are supposed to compete over how many voters they can persuade, not how many citizens they can disqualify or demoralize. We must eliminate unnecessary and unjustified rules that make voting more difficult, and overturn every single voter suppression rule that racist politicians use to steal votes from people of color. We need to outlaw partisan gerrymandering by Democrats and Republicans.
Our democracy is not for sale, and we need to end the influence of big money on our elections. That means overturning Citizens United. It also means ending the unwritten rules requiring anyone who wants to run for office to start by sucking up to rich donors and Washington insiders. No more donations from federal lobbyists. No more donations from PACs. And no more billionaire Super PACs.
When foreign governments sow division, attack our democracy, and interfere in our elections, we must fight back and hold them accountable. And to prevent future attacks, we must reject the efforts of those with power to weaponize hatred and bigotry to divide us. Whether black, white, or brown, we all want a democracy where every American can participate–and we’re all in the fight to build an America that works for everyone.
Equal Justice Under Law
Four words are etched above the Supreme Court: Equal Justice Under Law. That’s supposed to be the promise of our justice system. But today in America, there’s one justice system for the rich and powerful, and another one for everybody else.
It’s not equal justice when a kid with an ounce of pot can get thrown in jail while a bank executive who launders money for a drug cartel can get a bonus. It’s not equal justice when, for the exact same crimes, African Americans are more likely than whites to be arrested, more likely to be charged, more likely to be convicted, and more likely to be sentenced.
We need criminal justice reform and we need it now. That means ending racial disparities in our justice system. It means banning private prisons. It means embracing community policing and demilitarizing our local police forces. It means comprehensive sentencing reform and rewriting our laws to decriminalize marijuana.
Equal justice also demands that everybody – no matter how wealthy or well-connected – is held accountable when they break the law. That means new laws and a new commitment to prosecuting giant corporations – and their leaders – when they cheat their customers, stomp out their competitors, or rob their workers. It means judicial nominees that follow the rule of law instead of catering to the wealthy and the well-connected.
It won’t be easy. But we will make structural change to fulfill the promise of our justice system. Our democracy demands it.
A Foreign Policy for All
From endless wars that strain military families to trade policies that crush our middle class, Washington’s foreign policy today serves the wealthy and well-connected at the expense of everyone else.
For too long, our economic policies have left workers with the short end of the stick. We need to strengthen labor standards – and then fight to enforce them. That’s why Elizabeth will oppose Trump’s new “NAFTA 2.0” unless he produces a better deal for America’s working families. It’s time to stop prioritizing corporate profits over American paychecks.
A strong military should act as a deterrent so that most of the time, we won’t have to use it. We must continue to be vigilant about the threat of terrorism, but it’s time to bring our troops home – and make sure they get support and benefits they’ve earned.
We should also leverage all the tools of our national power, not just our military might. That means cutting our bloated defense budget and ending the stranglehold of defense contractors on our military policy. It means reinvesting in diplomacy and standing with our allies to advance our shared interests. It means new solutions to new global challenges, from cybersecurity to the existential threat posed by climate change.
Our strength abroad is generated here at home. Policies that undermine working families in this country also erode our strength in the world. It’s time for a foreign policy that works for all Americans, not just wealthy elites.
