As published on Medium on May 15th, 2019:
Last year, Hurricane Florence ripped through North Carolina,damaging Camp Lejeune. Hurricane Michaeltore through TyndallAir Force Base in Florida, leaving airplane hangars that housed our fifth-generation aircraft shredded and largely roofless. At Offutt Air Force Base in Nebraska,floodwaters swampedmore than one million square feet of buildings, forcing military personnel to scramble to save sensitive equipment and munitions. The total cost to repair just three bases? In thebillions.
Climate change is already impacting the way the Pentagon operates  its training, equipment, supply chains, construction, maintenance, and deployments. More and more, accomplishing the mission depends on our ability to continue operations in the face of floods, drought, wildfires, and desertification. The changing climate has geopolitical implications, as well. Its what the Pentagon calls a threat multiplier, exacerbating the dangers posed by everything from infectious diseases to terrorism. In the Arctic, for example, melting ice has made previously closed sea routes easier to navigate, creating greater chances forcompetitionand conflict over access to these waters and natural resources. In Southeast Asia, rising seas are forcing thousands of people tomigratefrom their homes, increasing the risk of ethnic and political strife.
In short, climate change is real, it is worsening by the day, and it is undermining ourmilitary readiness. And instead of meeting this threat head-on, Washington is ignoring it  and making it worse.
We have the most capable military in the world. Its also thesingle largestgovernment consumer of energy, and its dependent on fossil fuels. The Pentagon spends about$4 billiona year to power its bases at fixed locations and consumestens of billionsof barrels of fuel per year. An Arleigh-Burke class destroyer can consume1,000 gallonsof fuel in an hour while underway. It cost the Pentagon as much as$400 per gallonto transport the gas needed to keep bases operational at the height of the war in Afghanistan; in Iraq, convoys transporting oil and gas werevulnerable targetsfor insurgent attacks. And our non-combat bases often depend on a commercial power grid that can go down for any number of reasons: old infrastructure, extreme weather, cyber-attacks. When the powers out, it costs the Pentagon real money  more than$179,000each day.
Add your name if you agree
the Pentagon should achieve net zero carbon emissions for all its non-combat bases and infrastructure by 2030.
The Pentagon itself recognizes the threat. Our militarys top priority is readiness  ensuring that our service members are prepared to perform their mission. Time and time again, senior military leaders havewarned Congressof the national security challenge that climate change poses. The military is taking steps to become moreenergy efficientand resilient, reducing energy use, generating renewable energy, andadjusting construction plansfor extreme weather. But captured by Big Oil and its money, Washington continues to deny the threat and stand in the way of meaningful action to address it.
Nibbling around the edges of the problem is no longer enough  the urgency of the moment demands more. Thats why today I am introducing my Defense Climate Resiliency and Readiness Act to harden the U.S. military against the threat posed by climate change, and to leverage its huge energy footprint as part of our climate solution.
It starts with an ambitious goal: consistent with the objectives of the Green New Deal, the Pentagon should achieve net zero carbon emissions for all its non-combat bases and infrastructure by 2030.
And theres a lot more.
To improve readiness and resilience to climate-related events, we should also create a dedicated source of funding to adapt our bases in the United States and around the world. Lets save money by budgeting for climate change on the front end, so that the Pentagon doesnt have to ask for more only after a base is flooded or equipment damaged when natural disasters strike.
The DOD awardshundreds of billionsof dollars worth of contracts every year, so if were serious about climate change then industry also needs to have skin in the game. Ill ask contractors that have not achieved net zero carbon emissions to pay a small fee  one percent of the total value of the contract  and Ill use that money to invest directly in making our military infrastructure more resilient.
Ill direct the Secretary of Defense to appoint a senior official within the Defense Department and each of the military services to ensure that, top to bottom, our military is prioritizing the climate threat.
Help our campaign keep fighting.
Were counting on grassroots donors to make this campaign possible.
If youve saved your information with ActBlue Express, your donation will go through immediately.
$10
$25
$50
$100
$250
Other
And Ill invest billions of dollars into a new, ten-year research and development program at the Defense Department focused on microgrids and advanced energy storage. The Pentagon has been responsible for countless technological breakthroughs, working together with colleges and universities, our national labs, local governments, and private companies. Lets put that effort toward new clean energy solutions that will improve our security by allowing military bases to remain operational when traditional power sources fail, and save taxpayers money through lower overall energy consumption.
Finally, I want the Pentagon to produce an annual report evaluating the climate vulnerability of every U.S. military base at home and abroad, using real scientific methodology, so that we can make more informed plans moving forward.
We dont have to choose between a green military and an effective one. My energy and climate resiliency plan will improve our service members readiness and safety, all while achieving cost savings for American taxpayers. Our military understands that, and its time our elected leaders did as well. Together, we can work with our military to fight climate change  and win.
