American security and prosperity depend on robust diplomacy. Our diplomats are the front line of our engagement with the world. They serve in over 270 posts worldwide, many in difficult or dangerous locations. They communicate our goals in more than 70 languages. They manage conflict, help U.S. companies compete, and assist Americans abroad. Most importantly, they reflect our values on the world stage. But a diplomacy-first strategy to meet the challenges of the 21st century means that we need world-class diplomats. And after the Trump Administration, thats going to take a whole lot of work.
Through a toxic combination of malice and neglect, Donald Trump hasdeclared waron the State Department. In one of his first acts, heattempted to cut the State Departments budget by athird. Some senior career officials werepushed out, while othersresignedin protest. The State Department has lost60%of its career ambassadors and20%of its most experienced civil servants. And too often, these skilled diplomats have been replaced with totally unqualifiedcampaign donorsand otherTrump cronies.
But while Trump may have accelerated the exodus from the State Department, he didnt start it. Years of hiring freezes and spending cuts have caused many talented diplomats to head for the doors. Chinas spending on diplomacy hasdoubledunder President Xi Jinping  while Americas spending on core diplomatic capability hasdeclinedover the last decade.
To take a meaningful leadership position in the world, to protect American interests, and to avoid conflicts around the globe, we need to reverse this trend.Thats why today, Im rolling out my plan to rebuild the State Department.
Add your nameif you agree
We must reverse the trend of declining American diplomacy by creating a 21st century foreign service.
Growing a 21st Century Foreign Service
Lets start with the obvious: today our State Department is too small.
For our foreign service officers and specialists, opportunities for training are scarce and nearly 15% of positions abroad have been left unfilled for years. Thesevacanciesincrease workloads, damage diplomatic readiness, and contribute to burnout and low morale. And too few diplomats means missed opportunities to make important connections and develop a better understanding of foreign countries. Today, the United States lacks a presence in nearly 40% of world cities with populations over 3 million, many in the rapidly growing Indo-Pacific region.
The Pentagon is nearly 40 times bigger than the State Department  we employ more people to work inmilitary grocery storesthan we do foreign service officers. That has real consequences. Too often, our underinvestment in diplomacy and development causes our leaders to default to military action, instead of treating it as a last resort.
Our foreign policy should not be run out of the Pentagon. Under a Warren administration, it wont be.
Ill double the size of the foreign service and open new diplomatic posts in underserved areas to broaden U.S. presence.And to get the most bang for our buck, Ill prioritize growing core diplomatic functions like political and economic reporting and public diplomacy, and affiliated functions like the foreign commercial and agriculture services.
Achieving that goal means well need to recruit a new generation of foreign service officers while retaining the talented service we currently have.Heres what Ill do as president. First, Ill establish a diplomatic equivalent of theROTCprogram at universities across the country. Ill double the size of the Peace Corps, exposing young people to the world and creating a direct employment pipeline to future government service. Ill grow programs that fund scholarships for critically important languages; and develop or expand similar programs for new skill areas such as data science. And Ill create new pathways to re-incorporate expertise into our diplomatic corps, including by reducing barriers for returning foreign service officers by fast-tracking reentry for those who return within 5 years; and expanding lateral entry and mid-career hiring authorities and pay.
We also need to significantly expand the pool of diplomatic talent so that our foreign service reflects the diversity of the country it represents.Todaysforeign serviceis 79% white and 65% male  and the nature of the recruitment process also limits the number of diplomats from lower socioeconomic backgrounds. That changes in a Warren administration. Ill direct the State Department to correct the employment records of all employees fired or forced to resign because of their sexual orientation, to make it clear that all are welcome to serve their country. Ill dedicate recruiting resources to applicants from HBCUs and other minority-serving institutions, womens colleges, and community colleges. And Ill double the size of fellowships designed to recruit minority and low-income diplomats.
For all its rewards, a life in diplomatic service can be hard  deployments to dangerous places, missed holidays and family events, years spent away from home.We must do more to take care of diplomats and provide growth opportunities over the course of a diplomatic career.My Secretary of State will establish a core professional development curriculum, focused not only on diplomatic tradecraft but also the leadership skills appropriate for each career stage. We will require a broadening professional development experience  a graduate degree, interagency assignment, or cross-cone deployment  before promotion to the senior diplomatic ranks. And Ill enhance workplace flexibility to retain a diverse workforce, including by expanding parental leave and preferential postings for new parents and improving policies to ease hardships for dual-foreign service households.
Ill make my decisions with input from those who know best  formalizing procedures for career civil servants and foreign service officers to advise my Secretary of State on talent acquisition, retention, and other management challenges. No moreTillerson redesignthat wastes money on fancy consultants to tell us what our civil servants and diplomats already know.
Professionalizing our Ambassadors
Trump has perfected the act of selling swanky diplomatic posts to rich buffoons. In the Trump administration,$1 millionbuys you an appointment to the Bahamas  even if youre not quite sure what that means. For$2 million, you can become Ambassador to the United Nations. Trump nominated a real estate lawyer accused ofsexual harassmentas ambassador to Romania. HisSouth Africanominee is a handbag designer. In all, Donald Trump has appointed political cronies to nearly half the available ambassadorial positions  far more than any president in recent memory. As a result, opportunities for career professionals are severely limited.
The practice of auctioning off American diplomacy to the highest bidder must end.
This president may think a fat wallet and a big campaign check qualifies someone to represent our country abroad. I dont. I dont spend my time at fancy closed-door fundraisers trading favors for money, and Ill make my ambassadorial appointments based on only one thing: finding the most qualified person for the job.
Thats why Im pledging to put Americas national interests ahead of campaign donations and end the corrupt practice of selling cushy diplomatic posts to wealthy donors  and I call on everyone running for President to do the same. I wont give ambassadorial posts to wealthy donors or bundlers  period.
And Ill also ensure that some of the most senior positions in the State Department, including at least one Deputy Secretary position and the Director General of the Foreign Service, are always filled by experienced career ambassadors.
As I travel Ive had the opportunity to meet with our diplomats at posts around the world, from Beijing to Baghdad. Almost without exception, they are highly skilled, dedicated, resilient, capable professionals. Charting a safe and prosperous course in the coming years will require all of that and more. This is our chance to take our best and brightest young talent and put them to work for this country. We can create a bold and energetic diplomatic corps that looks more like the country it represents  and we can invest in diplomacy to make the world a little safer and a little more secure.
