Toolkit
Protecting The Rights And Equality Of People With Disabilities
Protecting The Rights And Equality Of People With Disabilities
“I’m running for president to fight for a government that works for everyone — not just the wealthy and well-connected. Now is our moment to dream big and fight hard.” – Elizabeth Warren
As President, Elizabeth will work in partnership with the disability community to combat ableism. And she will fight alongside them for justice across all aspects of life and to fulfill the goals of the ADA: equal opportunity, full participation, independent living, and economic self sufficiency.
MAKING DISABILITY RIGHTS A PRIORITY OF THE WARREN ADMINISTRATION
Elizabeth will make clear that disability is a priority in her administration by creating a National Office of Disability Coordination to ensure that federal programs support people with disabilities. She will also:
Build economic security for people with disabilities by ending the shameful subminimum wage, fighting for a $15 minimum wage, fighting discrimination in the labor market, and investing in workforce training;
Rewrite the rules of government programs like Supplemental Security Income and Social Security Disability Insurance to provide strong support for people with disabilities and move them toward financial security;
Ensure that technology is used to advance the interests of people with disabilities;
Build affordable and accessible housing and protect the rights of renters;
Invest in safe, healthy, accessible, and green public housing and public transportation;
Ensure that justice is at the center of our response to climate change and protect the rights of people with disabilities in emergencies;
Safeguard the rights and liberties of people with disabilities, from the criminal justice and immigration systems to parenting and voting; and
Establish an Office of Disability Rights at the State Department, dedicated to protecting the rights of people with disabilities around the world and pursuing inclusive foreign policy and diplomacy.
INVEST IN OUR KIDS
Elizabeth’s plan will support children with disabilities and their families and ensure that people with disabilities get a great education. She will:
Provide crucial early interventions and access to quality ADA-compliant child care,
Fight to fully fund IDEA, make school facilities accessible, and tackle discriminatory practices that harm students of color with disabilities;
Support English Language Learners and immigrant students with disabilities and provide resources for inclusive language development for Deaf and hard-of-hearing students, their teachers, and their families; and
Provide access to affordable, high-quality higher education experiences, by providing free public college and technical school.
END THE STRANGLEHOLD OF HEALTH CARE COSTS
Health care is a human right, but too many people with disabilities are frequently denied coverage, subject to discriminatory treatment, or receive inadequate services. We need a system that empowers all people to live full lives.
Starting on day one, Elizabeth will act to bring down the high costs of many common prescription drugs. Within her first 100 days, she will give everyone the chance to join an improved Medicare program that covers vision, hearing, mental health, dental, and long term care at little to no cost. Her administration will also end the bias towards institutional care and guarantee seniors and those with disabilities the right to home and community-based services. By year three of her presidency, Elizabeth will push Congress to transition fully to Medicare for All.
Because everyone in our country should have high-quality health care.
