As published on Medium on July 5th, 2019:
Our society and our economy demand so much of women  but they place a particular burden on Black, Latina, Native American, Asian, and other women of color.More than 70%of Black mothers and more than 40% of Latina mothers are their families sole breadwinners  compared to less than a quarter of white mothers. Black womenparticipatein the labor force at higher rates than white women, and Latinas share of the labor force has nearlydoubledover the past 20 years. And at the same time, Black and Brown women have more caregiving responsibilities, with Black and Latinx caregivers spending50%more hours a week on caregiving than white caregivers.
While millions of families count on Latinas and Black women to deliver financially, they face a steeper climb to provide that financial security. In 2017, Black women were paid61 centsfor every dollar white men made. Native women made58cents to a white mans dollar  and Latinas earned just53 centsto a white mans dollar*. And its getting worse: the gap in weekly earnings between white and Black women ishigher todaythan it was forty years ago.
Employers tilt the playing field against women of color at every stage of employment. During the hiring process, employers use salary history to make newoffers creating a cycle where women of color are locked into lower wages. Once in the workplace, Black and Brown women aredisproportionatelymistreated. In a recentsurvey, nearly two-thirds of Black and Latina women reported experiencing racial discrimination at work.
The path to higher-level management jobs is also rockier for women of color  a reflection in part of havingfewernetworking and mentorship opportunities with members of their same race and gender. Even though Black women and Latinas are often the leaders and decision-makers in their own homes and communities, they hold onlyone spoton the Fortune 500 CEO list and less than5%of Fortune 500 Board positions.
The experiences of women of color are not one-dimensional: sexual orientation, gender identity, and ability all shape how a persons work is valued in the workplace. But our economy should be working just as hard for women of color as women of color work for our economy and their families. For decades, the government has helped perpetuate the systemic discrimination that has denied women of color equal opportunities. Its time for the government to try to right those wrongs  andboostour economy in the process.
Thats why I have a new plan:a set of executive actions I will take on day one of the Warren Administration to boost wages for women of color and open up new pathways to the leadership positions they deserve.
Add your name if you agree
Its time to boost wages and open up new pathways to the leadership positions for women of color.
PROMOTE EQUITY IN THE PRIVATE SECTOR THROUGH HISTORIC NEW REQUIREMENTS ON FEDERAL CONTRACTORS
Companies with federal contracts employ roughly aquarterof the U.S. workforce. By imposing new rules on companies that hope to receive federal contracts, we can take a big step towards creating equal opportunities for Black, Latina, Native American, Asian and other women of color. I will issue an Executive Order that will:
Deny contracting opportunities to companies with poor track records on diversity and equal pay.I will build onexistingdisclosure requirements by requiring every contractor to disclose data on employees pay and role, broken out by race, gender, and age. And I will direct agencies not to enter into contracts with companies with poor track records on diversity in management and equal pay for equal work.
Ban companies that want federal contracts from using forced arbitration and non-compete clauses that restrict workers rights.Forced arbitration and collective action waivers make it harder for employees to fight wage theft, discrimination, and harassment  harms that falldisproportionatelyon women of color. And abusive non-compete clauses for low- and middle-wage workers needlesslyhold them backfrom pursuing other job opportunities. Companies that impose these restrictions on their workers will be ineligible to receive federal contracts.
Ban contractors from asking applicants for past salary information and criminal histories.Companies will be barred from winning federal contracts if they request previous salary information or violate the EEOCs criminal recordsguidance, which preventsdiscrimination against formerly arrested or incarcerated people.
Ensure fair pay and benefits for all workers.Federal contractors must extend a $15 minimum wage andbenefits(including paid family leave, fair scheduling, and collective bargaining rights) to all employees. This will have an outsized effect on Black and Brown women, who perform adisproportionateshare of lower-wage work.
Help our campaign keep fighting.
Were counting on grassroots donors to make this campaign possible.
If youve saved your information with ActBlue Express, your donation will go through immediately.
$10
$25
$50
$100
$250
Other
MAKE THE SENIOR RANKS OF THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT LOOK LIKE AMERICA
The federal government does adismaljob on diversity and inclusion. The share of Latinas in the federal workforce is about half that of the entire workforce. And even though Black women are disproportionately represented in the federal workforce, they are nearlyabsentfrom its leadership ranks. White workers make up nearly80% of the senior civil service despite making up only63% of the overall federal workforce. If were going to demand more of the private sector, we should demand more of the federal government too. My Equal Opportunity Executive Order will recruit and develop leadership paths for underrepresented workers by:
Diversifying recruitment: Direct real resources towards attracting entry-level applicants from HBCUs, Tribal Colleges and Universities, and other minority-serving institutions, and reforming our higher-level recruiting process to attract diverse experienced hires into senior management positions.
Supporting development:Create new paid fellowship programs for federal jobs for minority and low-income applicants, including formerly incarcerated individuals, focusing especially on agencies where Black and Brown women are mostunderrepresented.
Opening up promotion pathways: Require every federal agency to incorporate diversity as part of their core strategic plan and create support networks through a government-wide mentorship program that centers Black and Brown employees.
STRENGTHEN AND TARGET ENFORCEMENT AGAINST SYSTEMIC DISCRIMINATION
Sectors thatdisproportionately employBlack and Brown women  such as the low-wage service industry  have higher rates ofdiscriminatorypractices. But women in these sectors are muchless likelyto report violations. My EEOC will more closely monitor these fields and bring in top talent to enforce claims in those areas. It will also issue first-of-its-kind guidance on enforcing claims involving the intersectional discrimination that women of color face from the interlocking biases of racism and sexism.
These executive actions are just a first step. We need to do much more to make sure that women of color have a fair shot at opportunity and financial security. That means everything from enacting myaffordable housing,universal child care, andstudent debt cancellationplans to passing legislation to expand protections for domestic workers to creating stronger enforcement mechanisms that protect the right of all workers  especially the most vulnerable  to call out discrimination when they see it.
Its time to build an America that recognizes the role that women of color play in their families and in the economy, that fairly values their work, and that delivers equal opportunity for everyone.
* Much of the data doesnt let us fully describe the experiences of people with different and overlapping identities in the workforce. The data here assumes a gender binary  but we know that peoples experiences arent. There is much more work to be done to understand the barriers people with different identities face in the workplace.
