All three of Elizabeths older brothers served in the military  she understands the sacrifices that our service members and their families make, and our obligation to serve those who have served our country.
Elizabeth believes our government must deliver care and services worthy of the veterans it serves. She has fought efforts to privatize the VA and reduce service members earned benefits, and opposed cuts to the VA, TRICARE, Social Security, and other programs that veterans rely on. Elizabeth knows that VA patients are not serial numbers in a file. She has pushed to improve delivery of care at VA facilities, and for additional oversight and accountability in cases when the VA fails to live up to its responsibilities. And as a member of the Senate Armed Services Committee, she fought to establish the first-ever longitudinal study on blast exposure on Traumatic Brain Injury - to provide research and treatment for service members suffering from what has become the signature wound of recent conflicts.
Elizabeth has spent her career defending service members, veterans, and their families from fraud and abuse. When she established the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, she worked to create the Office of Servicemember Affairs to protect our troops from financial scams. And as a senator, she has worked across the aisle to safeguard those who serve. She helped obtain refunds for over 80,000 military borrowers cheated by loan servicers, and successfully fought to restore GI benefits to student veterans cheated by for-profit ITT and Corinthian colleges. She passed a bipartisan bill to restrict predatory lenders from repeatedly refinancing VA-backed mortgages to pocket hefty fees, protecting thousands of veterans from this abusive practice. And she successfully fought to expand financial protections for Gold Star spouses, passing a bipartisan bill to allow a surviving spouse to terminate a residential lease if a service member dies while serving.
Elizabeth is a strong advocate for policies that show our troops, military families, and veterans that we have their backs during deployment, the transition to civilian life, and beyond. In the Senate, she passed a bipartisan measure to protect student veterans access to education in the event of delayed GI Bill disbursements, and fought to expand access to Post-9/11 GI Bill benefits for Purple Heart recipients who were not previously eligible for the benefit.
And she has worked across the aisle to help veterans find jobs by making it easier for service members with experience operating heavy vehicles to get a Commercial Drivers License. Elizabeth knows the importance of honoring those who have sacrificed for our country. She worked with Rolling Thunder to establish a commemorative chair in the U.S. Capitol for missing service members and POWs, a lasting reminder of those who have not made it home. And she established an annual Military Retiree Appreciation Day to recognize the lifelong service of 2 million retired service members, honoring their ongoing service to their communities. As president, shell fight to protect all who serve, and those who love them.
Add your name if you agree
Our government must deliver care and services worthy of the veterans it serves.
