Toolkit
A Working Agenda For Black America
A Working Agenda For Black America
“Black history, American history, has shown us the way to the America of our highest ideals. A roadmap of resistance and endurance in the fight to transform the heart of our nation.” – Elizabeth Warren
Elizabeth Warren believes we need bold, structural solutions to reshape our economy, restore our government, and save our democracy. And that means tackling generations of racial injustice and systemic discrimination head on—including by creating a commission on reparations for the descendants of enslaved people.
Our plans and agenda will continue to be updated based on input and insight from Black activists, community leaders, organizers, policy experts, and stakeholders.
ADDRESS REDLINING  PROVIDE AFFORDABLE HOUSING
Elizabeth Warren’s housing plan creates a first-of-its-kind program to help first-time homebuyers living in formerly redlined areas buy a home and start building the kind of wealth that government-sponsored discrimination denied their parents and grandparents. Her plan will also:
Invest $500 billion over the next ten years to build, preserve, and restore millions of units that will be affordable to lower-income families,
Reduce rent by 10%, and
Create 1.5 million new jobs in housing construction and rehabilitation.
HEALTH CARE IS A HUMAN RIGHT
Nearly 11% of Black nonelderly individuals were uninsured in 2017. Elizabeth Warren is the only candidate for president with a comprehensive, effective plan to help as many people as possible, as fast as possible—and get us to Medicare for All.
Starting on day one, Elizabeth will act to bring down the high costs of many common prescription drugs, including insulin and EpiPens. Within her first 100 days, she will give everyone the chance to join an improved Medicare program and Medicare for All option that covers vision, hearing, mental health, dental, and long-term care at little to no cost. By year three of her presidency, Elizabeth will push Congress to transition fully to Medicare for All.
No more out-of-network costs
No surprises
No one going broke because they get sick
Elizabeth Warren will also tackle the maternal mortality rate — the data shows that Black women are three to four times more likely than white women to die from pregnancy or childbirth-related causes. By rewarding health systems that keep mothers healthier and holding both hospitals and care teams accountable for preventable failures, we can save women’s lives and demand change.
MAKE THE ULTRA-RICH PAY THEIR FAIR SHARE
Elizabeth Warren’s Ultra-Millionaire Tax asks the richest 75,000 Americans to pitch in two cents on every dollar of net worth over $50 million and six cents on every dollar of net worth over $1 billion. With this tax on the wealthiest fortunes in America, we can:
Cancel student loan debt for 95% of people who have it—which would help to close the Black-white racial wealth gap
Provide Universal Child Care and Pre-K, including raising wages for child care workers and preschool teachers
Provide free two- and four-year public college and technical school
Invest a minimum of $50 billion in HBCUs and other Minority-Serving Institutions
Invest $800 billion into our public schools so every kid has access to a high-quality public education
PURSUE CRIMINAL JUSTICE REFORM
The United States has the highest rate of incarceration in the world, with over 2 million people in prison and jail. The evidence is clear that there are structural race problems in our system — and Black families are disproportionately impacted. We can improve public safety and reduce incarceration rates in this country. When implemented, Elizabeth Warren’s plan will:
End cash bail that keeps people in jail for being poor
Repeal the 1994 crime bill that exacerbated our mass incarceration crisis
Get rid of private prisons so corporations can’t profit from people’s pain
Fundamentally change how police work is done in America
Provide solutions by prioritizing prevention over punishment
