A Compassionate and Modern Immigration System
Immigrants enrich our economy and invigorate our society.  Nearly half of the country’s biggest companies were founded by an immigrant to the United States, or the child of an immigrant.  America deserves an immigration system that assures human dignity as well as a secure border, encourages the determined and creative whose values align with ours to make their home here, and welcomes those refugees who have come to our shores in hope and desperation. 
Our administration will modernize our system to provide work authorization to students who complete their studies in the United States; smoother, more transparent, more secure and predictable visa application processes and enforcement; and a recommitment to our historic openness to refugees and new Americans.  Rather than caging children and demeaning families, we will support comprehensive immigration reform that provides a path to citizenship for undocumented residents of our country and Dreamers and others in the country without legal status.  We must also secure our borders and other ports of entry, but with more modern, more effective and less ham-fisted ways than with a physical wall.
A top priority from the start of our administration will be to undo the un-American policies pursued by the Trump administration at the southern border with Mexico.   We will immediately move to more humane ways of processing refugees, starting with reuniting child refugees with their families.  We will take steps to improve and support the asylum process, including by increasing the number of immigration judges.  And we will overhaul how immigration enforcement is done in this country, creating a culture within the enforcement agencies consistent with our values and our newly reformed laws. 
Evolve and Improve Legal Immigration
America benefits by welcoming and integrating new immigrants into our workforce and talent pool.  And we must not turn our back on America’s historic commitment to immigration.  Each year, the United States welcomes over one million new lawful permanent residents, who invigorate our economy and strengthen our society.
Modernize Naturalization. To support new Americans, we will improve the visa process, ending the endless backlog that frustrates the dreams of so many aspiring Americans and pushes others into illegal border crossings rather than legal processes.  We will make naturalization more affordable and more attractive for eligible permanent residents.
Streamline the Visa System. We will expand the employment-based visa system and allow for more flexibility in response to shifting priorities in the economy.  We will also address the backlog of family-based visas and increase the annual allotment for family reunification visas.
National Integration
Our entire immigration system must be rebuilt with the purpose of integrating new citizens into full participation in the American Dream.  As discussed in our Democracy Agenda, we will reinvent civics education, citizenship courses, and other efforts to promote American values and belonging.
We need a national policy focused on ensuring that New Americans are fully integrated into our social fabric and full participants in our economy.
In 2008, as Governor I issued an executive order to create a statewide plan for integrating new Americans and immigrants into the economic and social life of the Commonwealth. We will do the same at the federal level and open an Office of New Americans in the White House to coordinate a comprehensive suite of programs and opportunities designed to positively integrate new Americans into our nation and our workforce.  This will include expanded support for English language education, and new attention given to the unique challenges faced by foreign-born professionals.
Create a Pathway to Citizenship
America must have a fair and orderly process for the 11 million undocumented people living within our borders to become citizens of our country.  On average, each of these undocumented migrants has been in our country for 15 years.  Our economy and our society suffers by forcing millions of immigrants to live in the shadows, preventing them from fully contributing as members of society.
Comprehensive Reform. We must establish a formal legal process that puts these individuals on a path to citizenship while also ensuring that we never again end up with a substantial portion of our population living here without legal immigration status.  I will work with Congress to make that happen, building on the framework of the 2013 bipartisan “Gang of Eight” proposal. 
Reinforce DACA and Protect Dreamers. Short of a legislative solution, the federal government should not deport the children of undocumented parents who have lived their entire lives in the United States.  And I would immediately instruct immigration authorities to prioritize deportation only for those undocumented immigrants convicted of a violent offense, while working with Congress on a comprehensive solution.
Restore American Values at the Border
End the inhumane and un-American immigration policies that have resulted in thousands of families being separated and the denial of basic human rights.  We will restore compassion and dignity alongside a respect for the rule of law at the Southern border.  Our administration will focus on:
Border Integrity with Compassion and Common Sense. A nation requires borders, and our borders must be secure.  There are smart, efficient ways to enforce border security such as surveillance drones and camera systems that don’t require militarizing a massive swath of the country or wasting money on a “wall” that does nothing.
We will overhaul the culture and priorities of all the relevant enforcement agencies, including ICE, to prepare it for this new mission. Our border patrol and detention officers must treat refugees and asylum seekers with dignity or leave the force.  Our administration will give clearer guidelines for asylum, consistent with the larger project of comprehensive immigration reform.  Border patrol will prioritize ending human trafficking and other illegal activity rather than the harassment of refugees and families desperate for a better life. 
Reverse Ineffective Executive Orders. Immediately reverse through executive order the current administration’s “Remain in Mexico,” family separation policies, and the Muslim Ban. 
Reform the Asylum Process and Protect Refugees
At a time of global crisis and instability, when refugees are being forced from their countries by desperation, America has responded by cutting the cap for refugees from over 100 thousand to 45 thousand.  We should immediately raise the cap to the maximum amount we can reliably process, protect, and integrate into our country.
Fix the Asylum Process. There is currently a backlog of 850 thousand cases with only 450 judges to handle them.  We will at least double the number of new judges and substantially increase resources to process asylum applications so that asylum seekers are assured due process.  On the southern border, we will ensure that each asylum-seeker receives due process and legal representation—and that asylum claims are heard by asylum officers, not enforcement agents.
Confront the Regional Challenge. We will organize a comprehensive regional effort to address the violence in Central America that is causing millions of people worldwide to flee their homes in the first place.  Working with allies and our diplomatic corps, we will establish a strategy to stabilize countries like Honduras, El Salvador, and Guatemala.
Support Deval's Campaign
Only with the dedication of supporters like you, can we build a movement. Will you make a contribution to get our campaign off to a strong start?
$25
$50
$100
$500
$1000
Other
BACK TO DEVALS VISION
