An Economy for Everyone, Everywhere
Americans everywhere should have ready access to first-rate education — free from pre-K to community college or the first two years of a 4-year college; free or reduced thereafter, depending on a person’s participation in national service; and affordable and accessible through life-long workforce development and retraining.  In a knowledge-based economy, such as the world’s is becoming, education is the single best investment we can make in our own collective future.
As President, my administration will make those investments. It starts with universal pre-kindergarten and extends to supporting all K-12 teachers, and the public schools in which they teach.  We will work with states and cities to dramatically expand federal support for public schools, and pair that investment with new tools — like longer school days, smaller class sizes, after-school enrichment programs, or more social services in the schools themselves — to make sure every child has the opportunity to thrive, and to close persistent opportunity gaps.  The goal is to have excellent schools with excellent teachers within reach of every child, everywhere.
Public colleges and universities should be publicly funded to ensure that they are free or at least affordable to attend.  For those overburdened by student debt already, we will at a minimum refinance their debt retroactively to low or zero interest rates,  crediting excess interest paid against outstanding principal.  We will eliminate remaining debt, if any, by returning the federal estate tax to prior levels of 55 percent.  And any student who gives a year or more of national military or civilian service — a paid program we have proposed as part of the Democracy Agenda — would earn as many years of free tuition and fees at a public college or university.  Our mission is to enable Americans currently overburdened with student debt to have a fresh start, and to assure that students entering higher education have a high-quality, affordable public alternative to build their future.
Job Creation Track Record
By Governor Patrick helped revive an economy battered by recession, turning it into a global innovation powerhouse.
In 2006, when Governor Patrick was first elected, Massachusetts ranked 47th in the nation in job creation.
When Governor Patrick left office, employment in Massachusetts was at a 25-year high, with over 173,000 new jobs.
Massachusetts’ recovery from the recession beat national averages for GDP growth, job growth, and personal income growth.
Governor Patrick enacted the highest statewide minimum wage in the country, raising it by over 37%.
Governor Patrick oversaw significant investments to promote advanced manufacturing in Massachusetts.  When Governor Patrick left office, advanced manufacturing jobs in Massachusetts were growing 50% faster than in other states.
Governor Patrick’s Life Sciences Initiative invested over $1 billion in 10 years to make Massachusetts a global leader in the Biotechnology and Life Sciences Sectors.  The Massachusetts life sciences sector now employs over 74,000 workers.
Americans should be empowered, not limited, by their geography.  My administration will partner with entrepreneurs, small businesses, and community leaders to provide capital and mentoring to talented Americans in communities everywhere, and view all economic policymaking through the lens of regional equity.  The goal is to promote thriving communities and vibrant places, to get more opportunities to create jobs and wealth in the hands of more communities across the nation.
To deliver on that, our administration will:
Invest in the Future of Our Economy
Innovation is our competitive edge in the world.  Through investments and public-private partnerships, we must cultivate industries like clean tech, precision and advanced manufacturing, robotics, gaming, cybersecurity, transportation, green construction and biotech, urban agriculture, and regenerative and organic farming, biofuels, and soil carbon sequestration.  These are just a few of the economic revolutions underway and within our grasp.  America should dominate the innovation economy.  Not only does it play to our historical strengths, but it can also help answer some of our most pressing social and environmental challenges.
Nationwide, World-Class Worker Training Programs. It’s not enough to invest in the industries of the future if our workers and communities who need them most are not able to benefit.  I would pair these investments directly to our life-long training, learning, and enrichment programs so that all Americans who want to join in the future growth of our economy can do so.
Support Local Entrepreneurs
Our administration will support entrepreneurs in local communities to create more jobs and wealth.  During my time as Governor we launched a public/private partnership called MassChallenge to match talent that already existed with private capital seeking to support that talent.  The program blended private and public money to attract innovation and talent to Massachusetts to participate in a competitive accelerator program, matching ambitious entrepreneurs with local resources and mentoring talent.
We will scale up the model we established in Massachusetts and replicate it in communities across the country, partnering with local business, nonprofits, and universities to get capital in the hands of talented entrepreneurs, and to pair funding with deep mentoring from experienced local professionals.
At the same time, we will ramp efforts to support women entrepreneurs, entrepreneurs of color, and entrepreneurs in particularly underserved areas so that assistance in concentrated on those small businesses where it will make the biggest difference. 
Support Small, Growing, Independent Businesses
Small, local businesses are the backbone of the American economy, and they are the key to igniting growth in communities that have been left behind—especially historically underserved communities of color.
We will re-commit the federal government to celebrating and supporting small businesses through a revitalized Small Business Administration (SBA), led by an administrator who has started a successful business in an American community. We will grant the SBA new flexibility and new tools to make targeted grants—including start-up capital—in underserved communities and work with local partners on micro-funding smaller local projects.
Access to Capital and Technical Expertise
Improve small businesses’ access to investment capital by expanding the Small Business Investment Company, streamlining lending regulations for community banks, and providing new incentives for large banks to lend to small businesses. Though manufacturing states like Ohio and Indiana make up 33% of U.S. employment, they only receive 20% of national RD investments and 6% of venture capital dollars. We must increase businesses’ access to the capital and technical expertise they require to grow.
Build on management and technical assistance training programs and entrepreneurial development programs like Small Business Development Centers and Women’s Business Centers to provide the full suite of resources entrepreneurs require to grow their businesses.
Assess the critical gaps in debt and equity financing that entrepreneurs and small businesses face and work across federal agencies, state and local governments, nonprofits, and the private sector to ensure that business funding is spread across the country.
Equitable Business Development Programs
We will update and expand the guidelines defining a Disadvantaged Business enterprise (DBE) to expand the pool of minority-owned small business eligible to compete for federal contracts.  We will also take steps to direct federal pension funds in more minority-owned business.   
Across the federal government, we have many programs—some old, some new—meant to help distressed neighborhoods, like the Neighborhood Stabilization Program, the Hardest Hit Fund, the Community Development Block Grants, the New Markets Tax Credit, and the State Small Business Credit Initiative. We will undertake a government-wide assessment of the web of the programs that currently touch distressed neighborhoods and work to expand working programs, sunset unsuccessful programs, and fill the gaps between programs that leave many communities without the funds they need to develop.
Partner with Rural Communities
Rural communities are critical to sustaining our country, and a vital source of dynamism for our economy. We need to ensure that our rural communities are set up for a sustainable future—both for the next generation of rural citizens and a sustainable environment for all. 
Invest in Rural Communities. We will ramp up programs providing low-interest micro-loans to support small-scale agriculture, working with states to support local and regional markets for food and other agricultural products.   Our administration will support efforts to cultivate markets and jobs in climate resiliency, advanced manufacturing, conservation, and biomass energy production. 
Sustainable Agriculture. Invest in financial support for farmers today and research that helps improve efficiencies and maximize farmer earnings.  Focus on improving the environmental impact of our agriculture by reducing carbon emissions, maintaining animal and plant health, and expanding soil and food research. 
Broadband Access and Rural Infrastructure. As of 2019, over 20 million Americans lacked access to high speed broadband service.  Incentivize new broadband internet construction and provide states and communities the tools to leapfrog private construction, including public options if the private sector proves unwilling or unable to provide it.  Beyond broadband, we must make the infrastructure investments that these communities need to compete in a global economy. 
Education and Talent. Implement initiatives to expand college education in rural communities.  Reduce the effect of the “talent drain” in which educated individuals leave for their education and never return to work in their home communities.
Coordinate Policy to Serve the Underserved
We will coordinate and simplify the proliferation of disconnected federal programs overseeing economic development initiatives. Our administration will break those barriers down and streamline federal programs focused on expanding opportunities to all regions of the country.
Within the White House, I will appoint a policy leader to oversee this coordination across departments, and make certain that all our policies work together to serve the underserved, not the well-connected. This official will ensure that:Infrastructure spending prioritizes communities that have been historically overlooked;
Our education reform initiatives are preparing all Americans to succeed in a knowledge-based economy, right from universal pre-K through higher education and lifetime upskilling and retraining; 
New, ambitious investments in universal, high quality health care and affordable housing and childcare so that all Americans, regardless of background or zip code, have the opportunity to build the lives they want to lead. 
Support Deval's Campaign
Only with the dedication of supporters like you, can we build a movement. Will you make a contribution to get our campaign off to a strong start?
$25
$50
$100
$500
$1000
Other
BACK TO DEVALS VISION
