Civil and Human Rights
Civil and human rights are defining.  Protecting and expanding civil and human rights is the means by which America bears allegiance to its defining values of equality, opportunity, and fair play.  Accordingly, the Patrick Administration will support vigorous enforcement of existing civil rights laws, through sufficient funding and other resources for all responsible agencies, plus collaboration between federal agencies and state and/or local authorities, and updating, together with the Congress, our entire suite of civil rights laws and regulations to assure they meet modern needs. 
As head of the Justice Department’s Civil Rights Division under President Clinton, and a civil rights lawyer for the NAACP Legal Defense Fund, I have been on the frontlines of achieving justice for the poor, for minority communities, and those who have traditionally been marginalized.
At the Justice Department, I co-led the investigation of arsons at black churches across the South—overseeing what was at the time the largest federal criminal investigation in American history.  I defended voting rights laws against legal challenges, and prosecuted excessive use of force by police
I will bring that same perspective and commitment to the Presidency, and will ensure that my administration defends and protects the civic and human rights of all persons
On Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. Day, Governor Patrick launched his Equity Agenda for Black Americans, proposing specific commitments to address the barriers to opportunity, wealth, justice and equality that Black Americans continue to experience, and that as a result continue to make the American experiment incomplete.  Click here to learn more. 
 
 
Fight Hate Crimes and Domestic Terrorism, and Enforce Civil Rights.  In order to stem rise of racist violence against African Americans, Jewish Americans and other minority groups, and the retreat from civil and human rights, my administration will:
o   Strengthen hate crime laws and condemn hate speech in all its forms, setting a tone of respect for all and the rejection of white supremacy from the White House throughout the federal government. 
o   Hold social media platforms accountable for the proliferation of the most provocative hate speech and shut down the dark web where hate groups organize and acquire and distribute illegal contraband is sold.
o   Direct the Justice Department to investigate, disrupt and prosecute domestic terrorism with a comprehensive and coordinated strategy across federal agencies, and require federal agencies to collect and report on domestic terrorism.
o   Direct the Justice Department, the EEOC and all related agencies and offices to investigate and pursue all violations of civil rights laws prohibiting discrimination in employment, education, housing, etc.
         Restore Trust in Law Enforcement.  To put an end to police misconduct and the reliance on overly-aggressive tactics in black and brown communities, we will:
o   Establish a national standard governing the use of force in policing, and introduce new mandatory training in use of force and de-escalation.
o   Direct the Justice Department to impose accountability in local law enforcement and collect richer data on underlying police interactions.
o   Update and support community policing models on local police forces, with sufficient numbers of personnel to walk neighborhoods and build relationships with members of community.
 Champion the Equal Rights Amendment.  As President, I will lead a state-by-state effort to finally ratify the Equal Rights Amendment to ensure equal treatment, regardless of gender identity.  My Justice Department will take all necessary steps to lay the groundwork for, and appropriately enforce, the requirements of our newest Constitutional obligations.
Diversify our Judiciary.  We should have a judiciary that reflects the diversity and richness of our nation.  I will appoint exceptional judges with diverse backgrounds and life experiences to enhance the quality of our judicial system and ensure fairness under the law.        
LGBTQ+ Leadership and Equality
Results
Since he launched his first campaign for Governor in 2005, Governor Patrick has been a champion for the LGBTQ+ community.  Governor Patrick has proudly protected the Massachusetts law allowing individuals to marry whomever they love, and Massachusetts has set the example for the nation in equality.
Governor Patrick successfully fought to keep a measure off the ballot that would have stripped gay and lesbian couples of the freedom to marry.
Upon assuming office in 2007, Governor Patrick immediately reversed a policies making processes needlessly cumbersome for same-sex parents to alter their children’s birth certificates by hand, and instituted convenient, modern procedures.
Under Governor Patrick, Massachusetts was one of the earliest states to pass a non-discrimination law protecting members of the transgender community from discrimination.
 In 2011, Governor Patrick signed an executive order prohibiting workplace discrimination in state government against members of the LGBTQ+ community. In 2014, Governor Patrick approved a new state policy that required both private insurers and the state-run insurer to cover gender-transition procedures.
Equal Protection from Discrimination. Today, federal law does not expressly prohibit an employer from firing a person, or a landlord from terminating a tenant, because of someone’s gender identity or sexual orientation. And twenty-eight states do not otherwise offer that protection. We will work with Congress to push for immediate passage of the Equality Act, which would amend existing civil rights laws to explicitly ban discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation and gender identity in many areas, including employment, health care, housing, education, public places, and all federally-funded services. My administration will take all appropriate steps to make sure that the rights of LGBTQ Americans are fully protected by federal laws.
o We will rescind the Trump Administration’s rules and executive orders stripping LGBTQ Americans of legal protections, and replace those rules with new ones that adequately protect the rights, safety, and livelihoods of members of the LGBTQ community.
o This will mean, among other things, reinstating and strengthening the Education Department’s guidance to schools on transgender student rights. We must also make it easier for transgender and non-binary people to secure identification (such as passports), use government services, and participate in elections.
o We will step up enforcement of existing discrimination provisions—such as the non-discrimination provisions of the ACA—and ensure that agencies like the EEOC and Department of Justice are fully engaged in protecting LGBTQ+ Americans from discrimination.
o My Department of Justice will resist attempts by some states and private citizens to cloak discrimination against LGBTQ+ Americans in the guise of exercising religious liberty.
Repeal the Transgender Servicemember Ban. I will reverse the Trump Administration spiteful and irrational ban on transgendered individuals serving in the military on Day One. My administration will work with the armed forces to ensure that new transgender members of the military are fully integrated into the armed forces and treated with dignity.
Immigration, Citizenship, Asylum. Our administration will assemble a taskforce to ensure that our immigration, naturalization, and asylum processes are attentive to the unique needs of the LGBTQ+ community. We will also expand support for LGBTQ+ refugees fleeing persecution in their home countries, and earn U.S. global leadership on LGBTQ+ human rights.
Ban Conversion Therapy. We will push for a nationwide legislative ban on the harmful and absurd practice of “conversion therapy,” and will take all appropriate executive actions before Congress acts to prevent any federal dollars or support from reaching providers who engage in this discredited practice.
Mental Health. Through enforcement and regulations, we will work to end disparities in mental health care that disproportionately affect members of the LGTBQ+ community.
Stop Violence Against Transgender People. We will establish a new taskforce or unit at the Department of Justice to aggressively combat violent attacks on transgender individuals—and will have more to say about this important area of reform when we launch our comprehensive strategy for combating hate crimes.
HIV/AIDS. We will re-establish the White House Office of National AIDS Policy. That office will take the lead on:
o Expanding access to life-saving preventive drug regimens like pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP);
o Working with the health care community and the public, through awareness campaigns, to end the stigma associated with HIV/AIDS;
o Ramp up other preventative strategies and services, including access to condoms; and
Invest resources, time, and energy in discovering a cure for HIV/AIDS.
Support Deval's Campaign
Only with the dedication of supporters like you, can we build a movement. Will you make a contribution to get our campaign off to a strong start?
$25
$50
$100
$500
$1000
Other
BACK TO DEVALS VISION
