Fairness in Criminal Justice
America needs a justice system that focuses less on warehousing people than on preparing them to re-enter productive life.  We will achieve a more just system of criminal justice by eliminating racial disparities and providing the imprisoned with a meaningful opportunity to return to society, while ensuring that our communities remain safe and victim rights are protected.
Our country incarcerates too many people, including a disproportionate number of people of color.  We are failing ourselves by not investing in rehabilitation, education, and job training programs so that the formerly incarcerated are prepared to reintegrate successfully.  And our approach makes no economic sense, as we spend far more to warehouse people rather than find alternatives that provide a pathway to a productive life for people who have paid their debt to society. 
 
Our system should not punish people for race, mental health disorders, including addiction, poverty or youth.  An end to private prisons, mass incarceration, and the criminal prohibition on marijuana, a revival of parole earned through good behavior and acquisition of life skills and other programs to prepare the incarcerated for their release, treating those dealing with substance use disorders as patients instead of criminals, and sentencing reform that provides non-violent drug offenders a real chance at re-entering society through diversion, restorative justice and other alternatives to incarceration are all elements of this agenda.
Criminal Justice Results
Governor Patrick repeatedly introduced legislation to abolish mandatory minimum sentences for large groups of offenders—with a special focus on right-sizing sentences for non-violent drug offenses
The Governor advanced this agenda through 2012 crime
bill which reduced mandatory minimum sentences for non-violent drug
offenses. 
The 2012 bill also opened up opportunities for parole, work release, and earned good time for many individuals who were already in prison. 
The law also reduced the size of drug-free school zones, which had driven increases in the sentences associated with many drug offense.
Thanks to Governor Patrick’s leadership, Massachusetts reduced the “look back period” for expunging criminal records and “banned the box” requiring premature disclosure of criminal records on employment applications.
In 2013, Governor Patrick signed the “Raise the Age” law, raised the maximum age for juvenile jurisdiction from 17 to 18, keeping 17-year-olds in the juvenile system.
In 2014, in an attempt to spur progress in the state legislature, Governor Patrick reconstituted the state sentencing commission with the goal of setting in motion reform of mandatory minimum sentencing in Massachusetts. 
Eliminate Mandatory Minimum Sentencing.  Our country’s mass incarceration of its citizens—particularly of black and brown people—is a profound injustice and a policy failure.  Federal sentencing rules—especially mandatory minimums—have been disastrous in many communities and entrenched systemic, racial injustices.  These laws need to change, and mass incarceration must end.   
We will build on the FIRST STEP Act and other efforts to scale back mandatory minimum sentencing and guidelines that remove sentencing discretion, and work to make the FIRST STEP Act’s reforms retroactive, through the Pardon Power if necessary.
Our administration will:
End the crack/cocaine sentencing disparity;
Expand efforts to divert individuals with mental health and substance use disorders away from the criminal system;
Expand efforts to divert first-time non-violent offenders in diversion and other restorative justice programs;
Accelerate efforts at the Department of Justice to exercise clemency and Pardon Power to secure release of individuals serving excessively long sentences for non-violent crimes or others who no longer present a danger to the public;
End the practice of basing sentences upon conduct for which a defendant was acquitted; and
Make all reforms effective retroactively.
Eliminate the Death Penalty.  The Patrick Administration will impose an immediate moratorium on the death penalty, will commute all federal sentences of death to life imprisonment, and will push for legislation repealing the death penalty at the federal level.  We will also combat abuses of the death penalty at the state level.  Specifically, we will work with Congress to restore meaningful federal review of state death penalty cases, by repealing federal limitations on the writ of habeas corpus.  Further, the Patrick Administration will use every tool at its disposal to prevent states from carrying out executions using cruel and experimental means, including by reversing the Trump Administration’s refusal to regulate the importation of death penalty drugs.
Reform Plea Bargaining.  The overwhelming majority of criminal cases end not with a trial but with a plea bargain.  Too often, defendants feel pressure to plead guilty not because of the merits of their case, but because of structural imbalances in the plea-bargaining, charging, and sentencing process.  The Patrick Administration will combat this by imposing meaningful guidelines on federal prosecutors’ use of plea bargaining to make sure defendants are not punished for exercising their right to trial.
End Private Prisons.  The Patrick Administration will cancel federal contracts with private prisons and fully end federal reliance on private vendors in incarceration.  Since 2000, the number of people housed in private prisons by the Federal Bureau of Prisons has increased seventy-seven percent.  It is time to stop allowing for-profit corporations to make money off of our criminal justice system.  We will support legislation to ban private prisons throughout the United States, and will also support efforts by states to reduce reliance on private vendors in incarceration, including predatory companies that overcharge prisoners for basic services like phone calls.
End Felon Disenfranchisement and Restore Rights for the Incarcerated.  Restore voting rights to citizens who have been convicted of a crime, completed their sentence of incarceration, and returned to society.  Further, we should restore Pell Grant access to people who have completed their term of incarceration.
End the School to Prison Pipeline.  We must permanently disrupt the pipeline leading students from schools to incarceration.  I will direct the Education Department to lead efforts to end zero-tolerance discipline policies in public schools.  We will work with states to limit the role of police in school discipline, and reduce the reliance on invasive surveillance systems in schools except where necessary for student security.
Decriminalize Marijuana.  Remove marijuana from the list of Schedule I drugs, repeal laws making it a federal offense to possess it, and make those changes retroactive. 
Any change in our marijuana laws must be coupled with (i) equity for those currently incarcerated for marijuana offenses, (ii) additional research into, and awareness about, the effects of using marijuana, and (iii) support for legal marijuana entrepreneurs in communities disproportionately affected by criminal marijuana enforcement. 
Support State-level Reform.  Through competitive grants and direct funding, support sentencing reform and criminal justice reform at the state level.  With 88 percent of all prisoners being held at the state level, no criminal justice reform at the federal level will be near sufficient unless it makes meaningful reform here.  The Patrick Administration will expand federal support for alternatives to incarceration programs and efforts to end cash bail.  We will:
Form a Department of Justice initiative to partner with elected and appointed state prosecutors and judges around the country seeking to reform criminal justice and exercise prudent discretion, and share best practices;
Ensure that criminal justice reforms are evidence-based and effective at both substantially reducing the rate of incarcerated as well as reducing actual crime; and
End the school-to-prison pipeline by reforming juvenile justice and improving prevention and awareness efforts.  Building on my “Raise the Age” work, create incentives for states to address young adult crime in a way that aligns with brain science, and separate young adults from adult prisons.
   Fund Mental Health and Addiction Treatment Programs.  We must end the legacy and practice of criminalizing mental health and addiction disease.  For too long, those struggling with these illnesses have been mistreated and ignored by our criminal justice system.  As President, I will end this practice and increase investments in diversion and treatment programs.  I will also ensure that those battling addiction and mental health issues have access to the resources they need before they interact with our criminal justice system.  We must also expunge the criminal records of those previously convicted of low-level, non-violent drug offenses.
  Invest in Early Intervention Programs.  We should invest in programs that support people—especially our youth—before they interact with our criminal justice system.  We should ensure that schools are able to provide support programs for troubled youth, including social work and counseling services.  We should invest in community centers that provide after school programs so that children have an enriching and safe place to go.  
  Invest in Rehabilitation and Re-Entry Programs.  My administration will increase our investments in programs that lift people up and provide them with the support and training necessary to reenter society.  These should include job training programs so that individuals have the skills needed to find gainful employment to support themselves, their families, and help grow local economies. We also need to tackle the lack of affordable housing so that everyone can have a safe place to call home.  These investments will lower the rates of recidivism and help people get their lives back on track.
  “Ban the box” on employment applications and reduce the time following the completion of a sentence after which criminal records can be expunged.
   End the Criminalization of Poverty.  We need to end the practice of detaining people because of their inability to pay court fines and fees.  Your freedom and the justice you receive should not depend on your financial resources.  As part of this, my administration will support nationwide bail reform.
  Diversify Our Judiciary.  We should have a judiciary that reflects the diversity of our nation.  I will appoint judges from diverse backgrounds and experiences so that our criminal justice system reflects talent in every community.
  Increase Funding for the Public Defender System.  We must guarantee the constitutional promise of a right to counsel in criminal cases by increasing funding for our public defender system.  Our public defenders are overworked and underpaid.  We must increase our investments in this program to ensure that justice does not depend on your ability to pay for legal counsel.
  Create a New Presidential Commission on Criminal Justice Reform.  These policies should only be the beginning of the process to purge our system of injustice and prejudice, of broken lives, failed outcomes, and a severe—and, unfortunately, often well-earned—lack of trust.  I will create a new Presidential Commission to study what we have been doing wrong for half a century that’s led to the current system, and what must be done at a federal, state and local level beyond the current slate of proposals suggested today to finally do what’s necessary to restore justice to all Americans. I will model the commission off of proposals such as the bipartisan bill introduced by Senator Kamala Harris and others as the National Criminal Justice Commission Act of 2017.
    Importantly, the Commission will be tasked with looking into conditions of confinement, investigating prisons where conditions are deplorable and abusive—becoming counterproductive to the very task of our criminal justice system.  
Support Deval's Campaign
Only with the dedication of supporters like you, can we build a movement. Will you make a contribution to get our campaign off to a strong start?
$25
$50
$100
$500
$1000
Other
BACK TO DEVALS VISION
