Gun Safety Solutions
America needs better gun safety measures.  We must end the epidemic of gun violence in this country.  Doing so requires a comprehensive and common-sense set of policies designed to reduce gun violence and protect our most vulnerable citizens.
At a minimum, that means universal background checks and a ban on assault weapons and retrofits like bump stocks, coupled with a voluntary buyback initiative.  And it requires vastly expanded and consistent support for research into the causes and sources of gun violence, including the particular challenge of mental health.
Nation-Leading Gun Safety Record
Under Governor Patrick’s leadership, Massachusetts became a national model for addressing gun safety and curbing gun violence.
In 2014, Massachusetts passed a first-of-its-kind law granting local police chiefs the ability to withhold a firearm identification card from a resident who poses a threat to public safety.
Governor Patrick closed the “gun show loophole” in Massachusetts by signing a law requiring all parties to a private sale of firearms to first undergo background checks through a new online portal.
Massachusetts’ reforms have been cited as “a model for dealing with gun violence that the rest of the country could follow.”
The 2014 law added Massachusetts to the federal National Instant Check System, requiring the state to submit more data to the federal database, including state commitments for alcohol and/or substance abuse.
The 2014 law passed with the strong support of gun control advocates, law enforcement officials across Massachusetts, and state legislators of both parties.
 
Universal Point-of-Sale Background Checks for Gun Purchases
Dangerous people should not be allowed to purchase firearms, period. We will create a single, unified database for tracking who is too dangerous to own a firearm and step up enforcement of current background checks. We should regulate guns like we do cars, and establish a nationwide licensing system for gun owners.
We will permanently close the various legal loopholes that allow guns to reach the wrong hands. We will close the “Charlestown Loophole” to ensure that the FBI has time to complete every necessary background check. We will close the “boyfriend loophole” to prevent domestic abusers from gaining firearms.
We will support states that pass extreme risk or red flag laws, and work with Congress to end the gun industry’s legal immunity for the dangers introduced by the weapons they manufacture.
Ban Assault Weapons
Assault weapons are aptly named — they are designed to violently assault other people. These weapons are used by criminals and terrorists to kill or harm innocent victims. They should not be for sale in America. As President, I will work with Congress to ban assault weapons.
As necessary, our administration will provide monetary incentives in return for assault weapons to take these firearms out of circulation. We will also restrict the sale of high-capacity magazines that serve as the ammunition for assault-style weapons.
Ghost Guns. Target enforcement and regulatory effort to crack down on untraceable, dangerous “ghost” guns built from kits or made with 3D printers.
Coordinated Response. Assemble an inter-agency taskforce, led by a White House office or official, to coordinate and lead a government-wide effort to address gun violence and safety. This taskforce will be charged with working with states and local communities to design a comprehensive strategy to protect schoolchildren from mass shootings.
Address Root Causes
We will advance an all-out strategy to address the root causes of gun violence, above and beyond access to firearms. I will direct new funding to sponsor research into the nexus between mental health issues and violence, and sponsor programming to de-stigmatize mental health issues. In addition, we will:
Reintroduce, re-implement and build upon the Obama administration’s 2016 gun control measures, such as the firearm safe storage rule.
Ban the Tiahrt amendments preventing the government from disclosing data on firearm traces.
Spark innovation in gun violence research by kicking off a competitive grant-making competition at the NIH and/or CDC to seed the marketplace for the best ideas in solving gun violence.
Support Deval's Campaign
Only with the dedication of supporters like you, can we build a movement. Will you make a contribution to get our campaign off to a strong start?
$25
$50
$100
$500
$1000
Other
BACK TO DEVALS VISION
