Leadership in a Climate Crisis
Addressing the threat to humankind calls on the United States to lead the rest of the world towards a carbon-free future. Alongside our forthcoming comprehensive plan to address the climate crisis, my administration will lead a global effort to limit emissions, adapt to a changing planet, and reduce our global reliance on fossil fuels. We will immediately rejoin the Paris Agreement and bring climate change and clean energy into all aspects of American foreign and trade policy, as well as domestic and industrial policy.
As President, I will:
Set the Standard on Climate
We will commit to American leadership to advance a climate change agenda, working with and alongside both developed and developing countries to set stretch goals to reduce emissions and move promptly to a clean green future. We will immediately reestablish America’s commitments under the Paris Agreement, reinstating policies intended to achieve the United States’ 2025 Nationally Determined Commitment and fulfilling the United States’ 2020 reporting requirement. We will reestablish the United States’ contributions to the Green Climate Fund and actively collaborate on best practices.
Global Climate Accountability
In keeping with the global emergency we are facing, I will propose international oversight to hold ourselves and other nations to account for meeting our objectives, as well as to serve as a clearinghouse for the best ideas, practices, and strategies to share among nations. I will propose before the United Nations a new permanent multilateral body to create, monitor, and support national commitments to combat climate change. The purpose of such an organization would be to help us raise our own game on climate, challenge the rest of the world to meet theirs, and resolve disputes between developed and emerging countries over emissions targets. An international climate body would coordinate a response to the refugee crisis that our collective failure to act on climate change will aggravate.
Lead by Example
To effectively persuade, we need to model that behavior by jump-starting the clean-energy economy here at home. We will lead by example by promoting the green economy in the United States by decreasing our energy consumption while increasing our capacity for clean energy with the goal of an entirely carbon-neutral economy by 2040. We will re-invest in the American economy to improve and create new technologies and millions of good-paying jobs, with an emphasis on job creation in communities and regions most affected by the transition. As we develop groundbreaking technology, we will be able to market this abroad, once again taking advantage of our Nation’s place as the world’s leader in innovation.
Support Deval's Campaign
Only with the dedication of supporters like you, can we build a movement. Will you make a contribution to get our campaign off to a strong start?
$25
$50
$100
$500
$1000
Other
