Security and Democracy
The first priority of any President is ensuring the security of the United States and our citizens against an increasingly complicated series of threats. Longstanding threats, such as terrorism or nuclear proliferation, require new thinking and serious attention, not publicity stunts. New threats, like cyber and election security, call on us to respond with speed and agility. My administration will be prepared to respond to these threats with the full range of tools at our disposal.
Our priorities will include:
Arms Control
Rejoin and update arms control deals and multilateral agreements that make the world safer without sacrificing our ability to defend ourselves and deter future aggression. We will also take steps to limit the spread and use of new systems like hypersonic and autonomous weapons. While I will invest in the relevant research and development to maintain our security edge, I will also prioritize agreements to keep the world safe.
Cyber Defense
As President, I will aggressively support our defensive and offensive cyber capabilities, many of which are classified. We will be fully committed to defending our cyber infrastructure against all hostile intrusions and developing our offensive capability to meet any threat.
Election Security
Russia and its proxies interfered in the 2016 election and continue to threaten our democratic process to this day. We have already seen other authoritarian powers follow this playbook in attempting to influence the fair democratic elections of other countries. As referenced in my Democracy Agenda, I will use the full power of our government to update, secure and restore confidence in our democratic process.
This means, among other things, ensuring that states and municipalities are using secure equipment, investing in election infrastructure, security and training, conducting audits and risk assessments, and taking more deliberate steps to prevent election interference.
Support Deval's Campaign
Only with the dedication of supporters like you, can we build a movement. Will you make a contribution to get our campaign off to a strong start?
$25
$50
$100
$500
$1000
Other
