Physical and Social Infrastructure
Invest in Physical Infrastructure
Our country’s physical infrastructure is the platform that enables all other growth.  But for decades, we have failed to make the investments in things that allow our communities to flourish—like our roads, railway, and drinking water systems—and allowed some of our proudest achievements to crumble.    
That changes with my Presidency.  My administration will work with Congress, state and local governments, and the private sector to finally deliver on long-overdue investments in our physical infrastructure.  We will pursue a comprehensive, national plan to govern new infrastructure spending—one that ensures federal resources and expertise is getting to the right places, on time and at scale.             
And we’ll hold ourselves accountable—we’ll measure the success of each project by calculating and disclosing: by how many jobs were created through construction, how a region’s pollution and carbon footprint was affected, and by focused, objective cost-benefit and return-on-investment metrics so that we invest our common funds in the most deserving projects, not the best-connected communities.
Infrastructure—Principles
Decisions on where, how, and when to spend on new infrastructure will be driven by the following principles:
Climate.  We will not invest a federal single dollar in a project without a rigorous assessment of that project’s climate impact.  We won’t invest in projects that support legacy fossil fuel transportation and power generation—like roads, bridges, and the electric grid—without first requiring a carbon mitigation and re-orientation plan.  So, for example, highway projects must be paired with investments to support electric vehicles, or smart tolling programs to limit emissions.  And upgrades to our electric grid must be paired with investments in renewable energy generation and increased energy efficiency.
For any infrastructure project sponsored by federal dollars, we will achieve carbon neutral construction, through a combination of mandatory environmental standards, efficiency incentives, and, as a fallback, carbon offsetting schemes.  We will use government contracts and investment as a way to incentivize and spur innovation in environmentally-friendly construction practices.
Labor.  Consistent with relevant law, we will work hand-in-hand with organized labor at every stage to ensure that the jobs generated through infrastructure investments pay well, and lead to higher skill, long-term, permanent employment opportunities. 
Equity.  As we did in Massachusetts, we will make sure that no region is left behind.  Our comprehensive plan will focus on projects in every region and state that are tailored to their greatest needs.
We will tailor our strategy to invest in areas that have been traditionally overlooked by the federal government, whether they are urban or rural, communities of color, communities of high poverty, or otherwise.
Community Involvement.  Infrastructure is an investment we make in ourselves—in our own communities and our own economy.  Under my infrastructure program, we would involve local public, nonprofit, and business leaders throughout the process to make sure that the projects we invest in are projects that local communities actually demand.
Infrastructure — Priorities
In line with our commitment to addressing climate change, investing in education, healthcare, and economic opportunity, and supporting veterans and communities that have been overlooked by investment in the past, our administration will prioritize federal support for projects that improve:   
Carbon Reduction and Climate Resilience.  We will invest in climate-change resilient infrastructure and projects that will help us reverse the course of climate change, like soil sequestration.
Public Schools.  We will direct new funding to support the nation’s public schools, working with states to improve physical capacity across the country.
Disaster Recovery.  We must strengthen our critical infrastructure like chemical facilities, the electrical grid, and storm-water management systems so that we can withstand and quickly recover from disasters.
Roads and Bridges.  We need to invest in more efficient transit and more reliable shipping, bringing about an end to congestion and delays.
Ports, Train Stations, and Aviation.  We need modern and efficient sea ports, train stations, and airline terminals across the country.   
High-speed Rail.  We need to upgrade and expand our rail system, finally delivering on old promises to extend high-speed rail nationwide, and adding other regional low-carbon mass transit projects.
Military Bases.  Our military bases—especially housing options on those bases—are in urgent need of significant capital spending and attention. 
Rural Hospitals and Community Health Centers.  We need quality hospitals within reach of all Americans, and we need our Veterans Administration hospitals to become the pride of our country’s healthcare system.
Broadband.  We will finish the process of extending broadband internet to the entire country, with government laying the fiber and launching the wireless networks if the private sector won’t.
Electric Grid.  As contemplated by our plan for climate action and a clean-energy economy, we need a modern electrical grid that is secure, resilient, and powered by clean energy.
Water.  We need to guarantee safe drinking water for every American, while investing throughout the water infrastructure: dams, levees, sewers, and wastewater treatment facilities.
Infrastructure — Making it Happen
Strategy. We will stage our investments according to a multi-year, perhaps decade-long plan, paired with a responsible and deliberate funding strategy.  Our administration will coordinate spending and planning to ensure federal support complements state, local and private funding. 
Scale.  We will spend what we need to in order to accomplish our ambitious goals.  As a benchmark, we should be prepared to invest at least as much as the Trump Administration’s 2017 tax cuts for the wealthiest Americans and corporations cost the country.  After spending on education, spending on infrastructure generates our highest collective return to society. 
Working with Congress, we will fund these investments through a combination of (i) direct federal spending from a dedicated capital account, (ii) public-private partnerships, (iii) subsidized federal lending, and (iv) grants to states.
We will breathe new life into the kinds of bond programs that gave Americans the opportunity to contribute to and own a piece of large-scale national efforts like World War II. Bonding will offer the public a stake in local infrastructure and an opportunity to contribute to a national project.
Oversight. We will establish rigorous, independent, and centralized oversight of all infrastructure spending, to prevent fraud and impose accountability.
Invest in Social Infrastructure
Empowering Workers
Supporting Families
Promoting and Creating Affordable Housing
Ending Poverty
Getting Workers a Stake in a Renewed, More Equitable Capitalism
Transforming Businesses
Empowering Workers
I was proud to stand beside organized labor for eight years as Governor of Massachusetts, fighting for the rights of workers and overseeing historic job growth in every region of the Commonwealth as we recovered from the Great Recession.  Under my leadership, we enacted the highest state minimum wage in the nation, created tens of thousands of good union and middle-class jobs by investing in things like precision manufacturing, solar energy, and efficiency, and put state resources to work in new transportation and construction projects.  We protected the rights of undocumented and vulnerable workers, and brought labor to the table for every significant reform we undertook.
I will bring that same commitment, and a dedication to improving the lives and livelihood of working people, to the Presidency.  Of course, we need a living wage of at least $15 per hour and much greater penetration of collective bargaining schemes in private and public employers—and many more worker protections besides that. 
But we also need to think creatively about how to put workers closer to the center of decision-making and ownership in our economy.  We need fresh approaches to questions of worker governance and equity, and a new focus on how to support workers in the “gig” economy.  Our proposals build on the results we achieved in the State House, and on my career in the private sector as an investor focused on delivering social impact to deliver better rules, wages, and status for American workers everywhere.
$15 Minimum Wage
We will work with Congress to raise the minimum wage to at least $15 an hour and end the sub-minimum wage for tipped workers and those with disabilities.  Once it’s reset, it should be indexed to trends in the broader economy like median wage growth so that it is not eroded overtime as it has been.  Until Congress acts, my administration will require that all federal contractors offer workers at least $15 an hour, as well as fair benefits and the right to unionize.
Empower Workers and Unions
Unions have long been a driving force in raising wages and securing benefits for working Americans.  But over the last several decades, the power of unions has been systematically undermined, with the Supreme Court’s Janus v. AFSCME decision being only the most recent example.  My administration will support unions, collective bargaining agreements, and workers’ right to organize by:
Expanding and defending federal laws that support workers’ right to collectively organize;
Increasing penalties on companies that interfere with union elections, and making companies’ record on labor violations a key consideration when awarding government contracts;
Prohibiting overly-restrictive non-competes, anti-poaching agreements, and licensing requirements that benefit incumbent corporations to the detriment of workers;
Combating so-called “right-to-work laws” that undermine employees’ ability to unionize; and
Securing the rights of workers in the “gig” economy by supporting new rules like the “ABC test” to assure that workers receive fair wages and benefits.
The Patrick Administration will ramp up enforcement to prevent worker misclassification and will push for a broad “joint employer” standard to make it easier for workers in the gig economy to identify an employer with whom they can bargain.
Transition Assistance
In line with our education proposals, we will expand and fully fund the current program for helping workers who have been unfairly impacted by global trade, and improve it by linking it up with training and mentoring services.  Our administration will also extend assistance to support individuals who have lost their job because of new technologies. 
Close the Pay Gap and Ensure Equal Pay for Equal Work
Men and women doing the same work should be paid the same.  We will crack down on employers who discriminate based on gender and push for new rules and laws requiring employers to disclose gender discrepancies in pay.  Our administration will also support rules that prohibit employers from asking about pay history, which often locks women or other identity groups into a lifetime of lower pay.
A More Inclusive Workforce
Countless studies show a more diverse workforce creates more value in the market, and offers more people an opportunity to succeed.
A Patrick Administration will increase penalties and enforcement for firms that violate fair employment and civil rights laws, all of which will be expanded to include sexual orientation and gender expression.
We will reform all necessary rules to make sure that an arrest or conviction does not prevent anyone from earning a job and contributing to society.
We will establish federal guidelines to help employers adopt best practices to increase awareness of implicit bias and other factors, which can make it harder to hire qualified diversity candidates. Our administration will also institute a national reporting requirement on demographics of employees hired and pay to help track success in this area.
Supporting Families
Paid Family and Medical Leave
The United States lags behind much of the world in providing mandatory family and medical leave.  This has to change. 
Working with Congress, we will create a federal mandatory paid family and medical leave program modeled on those already in place or being rolled out in states like New York and Massachusetts. Paid leave should include parental leave for birth or adoption as well as leave for illness or caring for a family member.  
The program will be universal and gender-neutral, providing up to twelve weeks of leave, in addition to the paid sick leave or vacation leave that all employers should also offer. 
It’s not enough to change our laws, however, if we do not change our culture as well. In a country where child care still falls predominantly on women, we must make it the norm for both mothers and fathers to take time off so that women are not penalized in their careers for taking time off to have children.
Subsidized Child Care
Provide working families with support for affordable childcare in the form of a tax credit or direct contribution, so that they are no longer faced with the choice between caring for their children or providing for their families and contributing to our economy. 
Expand Family Tax Credits
As part of my Reform Agenda to create a system of simple, fair, adequate taxes, I will push to double the Child Tax Credit and the Earned Income Tax Credit to offer direct assistance to low and middle-income families.  These programs put cash into the pockets of the working families.
Retirement Security
Our administration will protect dignity and security in retirement for workers by protecting Social Security and ensuring all workers get the pensions they’ve been promised.  We will explore and invest in new programs that provide retirees with critical support services and long-term care as they age, and take steps to ensure that long-term solvency of Social Security.
Promoting and Creating Affordable Housing
In many communities, housing is out of reach for too many.  It’s not just in our booming cities—families across the country are struggling to find affordable housing, much less aspire to owning their own homes.  And homelessness—unacceptable in the world’s richest nation—continues to afflict too many Americans, many of them also struggling with addiction or mental health disorders. 
Build More Workforce Affordable Housing Everywhere
The first step to making housing more affordable is to dramatically increase our housing stock.  Over the last decade, our country’s stock of low-cost rentals has shrunk by 4 million units. Meanwhile, fewer than one in ten new rental homes built at the beginning of last year were rented for less than $1,050.  America urgently needs millions more affordable housing units.  I will work to allocate the billions of dollars needed to make that happen, using the entire force of the federal government to make sure that the stock of affordable housing in America can finally meet the demand.
We will offer federal grants for improvements to existing public and affordable housing, including by increasing funding for the National Housing Trust Fund, with emphasis on climate-friendly and energy-efficient projects.
My administration will funnel tax incentives, grant funding, and direct spending towards the low-income and working-class communities that are struggling most. 
We will create new and innovative incentives that will push states and municipalities to end overly-restrictive zoning rules that are exacerbating the housing crisis. As cities and states across the country experiment with ways to create more affordable housing at the local level, we will expand successful programs and work to roll them out nationwide. 
Immediate Relief and Protection for Renters
I will build on the housing voucher program and the Low Income Housing Tax Credit (LIHTC) so that every person eligible for a housing voucher or existing tax credit will get one, and I will explore new tax credits and other forms of rent relief as necessary to ensure that every family in America can afford safe, comfortable housing near their place of work. Additionally, my administration will protect existing tenants with stronger enforcement of rules that prevent unfair eviction practices and housing discrimination. 
Homeownership Justice
My administration will help put renters on a path towards owning their homes through programs like the renter tax credit and its associated special savings account. 
We must also recognize that the Nation’s housing and land ownership policies have a long history of racism that must be addressed. We must correct the errors of history.  My first step would be to resume implementation of the Obama Administration’s Affirmatively Furthering Fair Housing (AFFH) rule, which would have required that local governments take active steps to undo racial segregation.  
My administration will explore new ways to help racial and ethnic minorities afford the down payments on their homes, especially those in communities systematically undermined by racial discrimination and redlining. Strategies to rectify the historical wrongs of redlining will address both historically targeted communities and the communities that now host the descendants of the victims of discrimination.
End Homelessness
All of our efforts to increase affordable housing will help end homelessness, but there are things we can do directly to help those that need it most.  I will support innovative models to end the homelessness crisis in this country, focusing on increasing capacity at emergency shelters as well as improving access to mental health and counseling services.  My administration will take steps to coordinate policy across health care, social services, housing, and beyond to create a comprehensive policy that takes people off the street and into homes and productive society once and for all. 
Ending Poverty
Any program to end poverty must focus not just on how much Americans earn, but also what they are able to afford with those earnings.  Across my Reform, Opportunity, and Democracy Agendas, we have the ambitious proposals to put high-quality education, housing, health care, and child care within reach for everyone everywhere.  These are the very things that help people lift themselves and their families to a better life.  Several targeted proposals that address the root causes of persistent poverty include:
Increase Incomes for Working Americans
We need a coordinated effort across the federal government to put more money into the pockets of the Americans who are struggling most.  We will do this through a $15 per hour federal minimum wage and increased family tax credits, like the Earned Income Tax Credit and the Child Tax Credit.  We will do this by reducing the other costs that Americans currently face—especially housing, health care, and childcare.  And we will do this by shifting the benefits of economic growth back to the working people who deserve it—through stronger protections for labor, greater employee ownership, and a reinvention of our workforce training programs and infrastructure investments to reach the people who need it most.
Protecting and Improving the Safety Net
Successful programs like Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) and the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) have come under attack.  We should expand programs that have been proven to help all Americans feed their families and survive through times of instability and crisis.
Decriminalize Poverty
In America, as Bryan Stevenson so beautifully puts it, “the opposite of poverty is not wealth: it’s justice.”  We must break the false link between poverty and the unrelated concept of fault.  This means going through our laws—especially our criminal justice system—and uprooting every case where poverty dictates justice.  We will do exactly that through the criminal justice plank of our Reform Agenda—focusing on: reducing reliance on cash bail and fines, ending the school-to-prison pipeline, and ending mass incarceration driven by mandatory minimums. 
Increase Political Representation for the Poor  
Our government pays too much attention to the wealthy and well-connected and not nearly enough to the working poor and those struggling to get by.  Through my Democracy Agenda, we will fight new voting restrictions, end felon disenfranchisement, fix the Voting Rights Act, end partisan gerrymandering, protect the Census, get dark money out of politics and make the other reforms necessary so that our government represents our people—all our people.  Only then can reforms be done with the working poor and those living in poverty, rather than done to them.
Getting Workers a Stake in a Renewed, More Equitable Capitalism
Employees deserve more of a voice and a greater economic stake in private corporations.  We need a capitalism where employees succeed no less than shareholders, where the profits of corporations do not come at the expense of society and the environment, and where all Americans share in the collective prosperity of our economy.  Achieving this more inclusive version of capitalism requires that we finally give employees a real stake, with financial ownership in both the corporations at which we work and in the economy we collectively own.  My policies, which are informed by my experiences in business, will do precisely that.
Support and Promote Employee-Owned Business
The federal government should create pathways to forming and expanding employee-owned enterprises that give employees both a job and a stake in their workplace.  Our administration, through a combination of grants, equity investments, loans, and loan guarantees, alone or in partnership with state and local governments, nonprofits, and the private sector, can remove this barrier to launch the next generation of companies more inclusive and democratic than corporations today.  
Guarantee Employee Buy-out Lending
The federal government should provide loan guarantees for employees who wish to buy-out their owners.  These loan guarantees could be modeled after similar commercial guarantee programs like the Export-Import Bank.  Guarantees could apply both to control and minority investments. 
Achieve Significant Employee Ownership and Wealth Creation by 2050
The federal government can play a leading role in supporting new corporate forms and business models that are built around partial or full employee ownership through existing economic development agencies and new programs within those agencies created specifically to encourage employee-ownership. 
I will direct the Commerce and Treasury Departments to remove every barrier to employee ownership, and I would form a new head of employee ownership within my administration to oversee these efforts, including proposing and enacting the appropriate promotions, incentives, and changes required to make employee ownership as viable and attractive as possible. 
Through these and other mechanisms, my administration would put our economy on-track to significant employee ownership by 2050, such that the prosperity of our corporations and our employees went hand-in-hand. I would target a significant portion of the equity-value of our corporations to be held by employees outside of the executive suite. 
Ensure Ownership Comes with True Leadership, Governance, and Control
As employees gain a significant stake in our corporations, we will ensure that this financial stake comes along with the leadership, governance, and control of our corporations that it deserves.  Employees will be able to vote for who represents them on their board of directors, on key shareholder proposals, and on the strategic direction of their companies.  Through this transition, we will make sure that employees are equipped with the training, information, and processes they need to be prudent stewards of their corporations. 
Transforming Businesses
Transform Corporations to Benefit All Stakeholders
For decades, our corporate sector has been blinded by its pursuit of short-term profits for shareholders over and above all other concerns.  As a result, even as the stock market soars the workers, customers, consumers, and other stakeholders in our economy have suffered. 
Benefit Corporations. We will encourage all companies to explicitly change their corporate charters to clarify their obligation to benefit all constituents, not just shareholders.  The evidence is clear that when businesses commit to meeting socially responsible goals they can improve their financial returns to all stakeholders.    
Rather than run for the sole benefit of shareholders, the companies that dominate our economy should be held responsible for the impact they have on all their stakeholders. The Benefit Corporation model, in which corporations recognize a broader set of legal obligations in their articles of incorporation to produce a public benefit, offers a radically different way to conceive of the corporation, while still staying true to how corporate law has been done in our country for hundreds of years. 
My administration, in coordination across the Departments of Treasury and Commerce and the regulatory bodies like the Securities and Exchange Commission, will encourage the formation Benefit Corporations and conversion of traditionally formed companies into Benefit Corporations.
Over time, we will target a specific proportion of corporations to be registered as Benefit Corporations and make the legal and regulatory changes required to achieve these goals.
New and Improved Reporting and Disclosure Standards
Today, we have well intended but highly complex reporting and disclosure requirements limited to financial and operating requirements.  My administration will simplify and streamline these reporting and disclosure standards, and expand them to address social and environmental impact.  As a result, most social and environmental disclosures are self-reported, cherry-picked, and untrustworthy.
Under my administration, we will standardize the reporting and disclosure standards for metrics like worker well-being and carbon-emissions so that all stakeholders have an accurate view of the broader impacts corporations are having.
Combat Short-Termism in All Its Forms
Just as our politics has come to focus only on the next election cycle or the next news cycle, so too have our corporations come to focus just on the next set of quarterly earnings numbers.  This can come from the way that corporations report or project profits on a quarterly basis, from how our financial intermediaries like mutual funds are judged and assessed, and on how executives are compensated.  The result has been a system riddled with incentives to maximize short-term profits rather than the long-term prosperity of all a corporation’s stakeholders.  Working with oversight agencies and the business community, we will examine the reasons why companies are so focused on short-term return over long-term value, and seek appropriate reforms to change that.
Support Deval's Campaign
Only with the dedication of supporters like you, can we build a movement. Will you make a contribution to get our campaign off to a strong start?
$25
$50
$100
$500
$1000
Other
BACK TO DEVALS VISION
