Simple, Fair, Adequate Taxes
Government, as former Congressman Barney Frank used to say, is just the name we give to the things we choose to do together.  Government is about how we define the civilization we want; taxes are how we pay for it.  But our tax system today is badly broken.  It’s out of balance, unnecessarily complicated, inefficient and rife with opportunities for gaming and abuse.  We must reform our tax system so that it is simple, fair and adequate to the task.  Our guiding principle will be the belief that taxes are not a penalty but just the cost of our civilization.
That’s how we governed in Massachusetts.  Through strong fiscal management, Massachusetts secured the highest bond ratings in its history under our administration.  During my tenure as Governor, annual budget increases averaged 3.5%, in contrast with the previous Administration’s average of 4.9%—while making historic investments in education, infrastructure and innovation.
My reform plan for personal taxes would tax citizens progressively based on their ability to contribute, eliminate loopholes and unnecessary exclusions and deductions, and increase enforcement to ensure that all citizens contribute their share.  It would treat all income as ordinary income, whether from wages, capital gains, dividends or carried interest.  It would expand tax credits that aid working Americans like the Earned Income Tax Credit and the Child Tax Credit.  We would also increase the estate tax to 55% (in lieu of a wealth tax).
We will require corporations to pay their fair share by raising the corporate tax rate to 25%, eliminating loopholes that allow some of our most successful and profitable corporations pay no federal taxes whatsoever, and imposing new rules to stop corporations to shift their operations overseas solely for the purpose of evading U.S. taxes.
Altogether, my tax reform reforms would raise the revenue required to invest in our country and our future as efficiently and fairly as possible.
Priorities
Simple, Fair, and Adequate Income Taxes.  Individual income taxes and payroll taxes make up almost 90% of all federal government revenue, of which income taxes are nearly two-thirds.  Substantive tax reform starts here. Fair Share.  Increase the share borne by the wealthiest Americans by expanding the spread between high income and middle income effective tax rates.  We will target returning to the rates in effect before the Bush and Trump tax cuts shifted a greater tax burden away from the wealthiest and onto middle class Americans.
Simplify.  If we eliminate the hundreds of deductions, exclusions and credits in our system, we can tax at reasonable rates across the board while assuring fairness and reducing the burden of filing taxes. 
 
Close Unfair Loopholes.  We will bring fairness back to the tax code by closing other old loopholes that the 2017 tax law didn’t close, and closing new ones that the 2017 tax law opened up—such as loopholes that allow multinational companies with foreign operations to avoid customary tax obligations.
Expand Family Tax Credits.  I will push to significantly increase the Child Tax Credit and the Earned Income Tax Credit to offer direct assistant to low and middle-income families.  This will radically cut the number of children and working families who live in poverty.  To maximize the impact of these credits in the daily lives of families, these tax credits should be fully refundable and paid monthly.
Streamline Filing.  For many filers, the government already has most of the information you need to fill out on your tax forms—it would be far simpler and more efficient if the IRS supplied individuals with a tax form already filled out.  I will direct the IRS to study and pilot a program to auto-populate personal tax returns.
Tax All Income as Income.  Income is income. People who make most of their money through capital gains should not benefit from a lower tax rate than that which applies to people who earn their way from wages.  Therefore, in my plan, capital gains, dividends, interest, carried interest, and other forms of income, would be treated as ordinary income. 
Increase the Estate Tax.  The wealthy and well-connected have changed the rules to inherit vast fortunes tax free, requiring the rest of us to bear the nation’s generational responsibility.  I would return the estate tax thresholds and rates back to the reasonable levels that prevailed in 2001, to 55%, with an exemption for the first ten million dollars, that protects family assets like a farm or a small business.  Additionally, we will explore the feasibility of taxing capital gains at death for those above a threshold so that the wealthiest Americans can no longer permanently avoid paying taxes on appreciated assets.
Require Corporations to Pay Their Fair Share.  Investing in the future requires corporations to contribute their fair share to the things necessary to build America’s future.  Under our plan, we will:Increase corporate tax rates to 25%, reflecting the current consensus among the business community for a globally competitive rate;
Eliminate loopholes and deductions and reform tax provisions for multinational companies that allow some of our most successful and profitable corporations pay no federal taxes whatsoever;
Impose new rules and steep penalties to make it impossible for corporations to shift their operations overseas solely for the purpose of evading U.S. taxes, or to make other non-business actions purely for the purposes of tax avoidance;
Create a back-stop for taxing multinational corporations which are too aggressive in exploiting loopholes such as using financial reports or assessing tax receipts by country of operation.
Aggressively Pursue Tax Evaders.  Taxpayers pay 82% of their taxes voluntarily and on time.  From 2008 through 2010, that meant $458 billion of tax revenue that was paid late or not at all.  We will double the funding the IRS receives to conduct enforcement to assure everyone pays their fair share on time and in full.
Cut Government Waste, Fraud and Abuse. To deter fraud and help people gain confidence in their government, we will pursue maximum transparency across all agencies, including by opening operating budgets up to greater public scrutiny.  We will support efforts to identify waste and fraud, and my administration will consider proposals to unify all watchdog and inspector general functions into one central public integrity bureau that operates across the entire executive branch. 
Support Deval's Campaign
Only with the dedication of supporters like you, can we build a movement. Will you make a contribution to get our campaign off to a strong start?
$25
$50
$100
$500
$1000
Other
BACK TO DEVALS VISION
