The Middle East
My administration will approach the Middle East with a comprehensive strategy that involves defending Israel, promoting independent Israeli and Palestinian sovereignty, countering violent extremism, and promoting economic development and collaboration. We will work with partners in Iraq and beyond. To mend the Sunni-Shia rift, we must also counter the threat of a nuclear Iran and ease tensions around the Gulf. We will rebuild strategic alliances to win back the ground we have lost against regional adversaries, including ISIS, after President Trump’s damaging decision to withdraw from Syria. I will also work with Congress to pursue a regional development package to strengthen cross-border ties through new, incentive-driven investment in technology, energy and infrastructure.
 
Israel
Israel’s right to exist is beyond question.  Israel is also a vital democratic ally in the Middle East.  At the same time, the Palestinians’ right to self-determination within a democratic framework must be acknowledged and addressed.  For that reason, I support a two-state solution to the Israeli-Palestinian stalemate, and would press for that with all of the diplomatic, educational, economic and social leverage available to the United States. Pressing for a two-state arrangement is essential to securing Israel’s future as a Jewish, democratic state as well as Palestinians’ right to nationhood and an end to the humanitarian crisis in Gaza.  The United States should be prepared, in coalition with our allies, to guarantee the security of Israel.  We should also be prepared to guarantee the integrity of the negotiated borders of a democratic Palestinian state as part of a two-state solution.
Afghanistan
The regime in control of Iran is a threat to the security of Israel, the region, and beyond.  Iran’s nuclear capability must be checked, and can be contained without regime change.  The right way to do so is as part of a coalition with our allies and others in the region and beyond.  I remain convinced that there is a diplomatic solution to our disagreements with Iran. De-escalating the current crisis means bringing the Iranian regime back to the negotiating table and making real progress to address both the nuclear program and Iranian support for terrorist proxies in the region.  The Trump administration’s “maximum pressure” campaign failed because there was no credible pathway for the Iranians to meet American demands and seek relief from sanctions.  Working with our regional and global allies, my administration would provide a path for de-escalation by establishing benchmarks and a progressive step-down from the current tense environment to a nuclear-free future and sanctions relief in the form of a new Iran Deal—a so-called JCPOA 2.0.  Any process must ultimately address and degrade Iran’s support for terrorist groups and proxies in the region, including in Iraq.
Iran
The regime in control of Iran is a threat to the security of Israel, the region, and beyond.  Iran’s nuclear capability must be checked, and can be contained without regime change.  The right way to do so is as part of a coalition with our allies and others in the region and beyond.  I remain convinced that there is a diplomatic solution to our disagreements with Iran.
De-escalating the current crisis means bringing the Iranian regime back to the negotiating table and making real progress to address both the nuclear program and Iranian support for terrorist proxies in the region.  The Trump administration’s “maximum pressure” campaign failed because there was no credible pathway for the Iranians to meet American demands and seek relief from sanctions.  Working with our regional and global allies, my administration would provide a path for de-escalation by establishing benchmarks and a progressive step-down from the current tense environment to a nuclear-free future and sanctions relief in the form of a new Iran Deal—a so-called JCPOA 2.0.  Any process must ultimately address and degrade Iran’s support for terrorist groups and proxies in the region, including in Iraq.
Saudi Arabia
Saudi Arabia has been a longstanding and important historic ally.  The United States has significant military and economic relationships with Saudi Arabia, which I will respect as President.  Nevertheless, we cannot, consistent with the values stated above, accept Saudi misconduct on the world stage.  Saudi Arabia’s official complicity in the assassination of Jamal Khashoggi and the Kingdom’s war in Yemen, with its indiscriminate targeting of civilians, are appalling and risk disqualifying the Kingdom from membership among civilized nations.
We must reassess our relationship with Saudi Arabia.  My administration will cease supplying Saudi Arabia with arms and support for the Yemen campaign.  We will engage in a strategic re-assessment of our relationships in the Gulf to better align those relationships with our historic commitment to democracies.  My administration will deploy the power of the United States selectively and thoughtfully to protect our national interests and project our values in the region.
Support Deval's Campaign
Only with the dedication of supporters like you, can we build a movement. Will you make a contribution to get our campaign off to a strong start?
$25
$50
$100
$500
$1000
Other
