Universal, Affordable, Lifelong Education
Americans everywhere should have ready access to first-rate education — free from pre-K to community college or the first two years of a 4-year college; free or reduced thereafter, depending on a person’s participation in national service; and affordable and accessible through life-long workforce development and retraining.  In a knowledge-based economy, such as the world’s is becoming, education is the single best investment we can make in our own collective future.
As President, my administration will make those investments. It starts with universal pre-kindergarten and extends to supporting all K-12 teachers, and the public schools in which they teach.  We will work with states and cities to dramatically expand federal support for public schools, and pair that investment with new tools — like longer school days, smaller class sizes, after-school enrichment programs, or more social services in the schools themselves — to make sure every child has the opportunity to thrive, and to close persistent opportunity gaps.  The goal is to have excellent schools with excellent teachers within reach of every child, everywhere.
Public colleges and universities should be publicly funded to ensure that they are free or at least affordable to attend.  For those overburdened by student debt already, we will at a minimum refinance their debt retroactively to low or zero interest rates,  crediting excess interest paid against outstanding principal.  We will eliminate remaining debt, if any, by returning the federal estate tax to prior levels of 55 percent.  And any student who gives a year or more of national military or civilian service — a paid program we have proposed as part of the Democracy Agenda — would earn as many years of free tuition and fees at a public college or university.  Our mission is to enable Americans currently overburdened with student debt to have a fresh start, and to assure that students entering higher education have a high-quality, affordable public alternative to build their future.
Support for Public Schools
Despite governing through the Great Recession, Governor Patrick made unprecedented investments in Massachusetts public education. Public schools were funded at record levels every year he was in office.
By the end of his administration, Governor Patrick increased state funding for public schools by over $1 billion annually, a 34% increase from the beginning of the Patrick Administration.  Massachusetts students repaid that investment by ranking  ranked first in student achievement in the United States and near the top of global rankings.
During Governor Patrick’s tenure, four-year high school graduation rates increased by 7% for all students and 16% for low-income students.
Governor Patrick was named “America’s Greatest Education Governor” by the national teachers’ union in 2014.
In 2015, then-Education Secretary Arne Duncan praised Governor Patrick’s education leadership in an op-ed, calling Governor Patrick an “education governor.”
Universal Pre-Kindergarten
Early childhood, pre-kindergarten education should be within reach of any family.  There is widespread consensus that early childhood education leads to significantly better learning and life outcomes.  To make this goal a reality, the Patrick Administration will prioritize:
Expanding Access to Early Education. The Patrick Administration will work with states, cities and rural communities to support best practices and the most effective models to provide early learning opportunities for infants and toddlers.  Federal investments will be based on research and data demonstrating superior outcomes.
Expanding Early Education Services. On top of access, our administration will promote efforts to expand the kinds of services available to parents and young learners at pre-schools.  Paired with our proposals for early childcare, we will transform preschools into sites where parents can access a full range of social services, and serve as engines of mobility.
Training and Parity for Early Educators. Pre-kindergarten programs must be more than just a safe place for a young child to go during the day.  Rather, it is essential that pre-kindergarten programs propel student learning and life success.  In order to achieve this, we must acknowledge early educators as the professional educators that they are.
Under my administration, we will focus federal investment in early education on those programs that offer increased training and support for early educators.  We will support programs that provide increased compensation, benefits and training—including pay parity with similarly credentialed public school teachers.  And we will also expand investment in early educator scholarship and loan forgiveness programs (perhaps through our national Service initiatives) to facilitate the recruitment and retention of more high-quality trained educators. 
Early Education Infrastructure. Many communities currently lack the facilities necessary to make universal pre-kindergarten a reality.  We will make federal funding available to facilitate new construction and retrofitting of existing schools to meet the increased demand for seats and the unique needs of our youngest learners.
Support Public Teachers and Schools
Having a well-prepared and committed teacher in front of a classroom can transform the life of a young child, and retrace the arc of that young person’s entire life.  We must treat public school teachers as the professionals they are, supporting those in service and attracting and retaining talent for the future.  Under my administration, we will increase the support the federal government provides public school teachers and the schools in which they teach in at least the following ways:
Direct Federal Funding to Increase Teacher Pay. As President, I will support a multi-fold increase in Title I funds, the primary federal resources available to schools that serve the highest percentage of low-income students.  We will direct local school districts to use these additional funds to increase teacher pay in the neediest schools to close the teacher pay gap and help attract talented educators to schools serving low-income students. 
Invest in Evidence-Based Programs to Train and Retain Teachers. We will create a new federal fund to support evidence-based programs that support teacher training, increase retention, and ensure that the diversity and cultural sensitivity of our teacher workforce matches the diversity of our country and our students.  My Department of Education will work with states to identify and fund programs that improve teacher training, create mentorship programs for new teachers, expand leadership and career advancement opportunities for teachers, increase teacher pay, incentivize teachers to take and stay in hard-to-fill positions, and provide other needed classroom supports. 
Incentivize Innovation within Education. No individual or group of individuals has a monopoly on good ideas.  Our plan will incentivize states and local school districts to come up with creative solutions to support the specific needs of teachers in their area.  We will create a competitive grant program that pushes states to adopt policies that support the teaching profession.  States will then be awarded federal grants to support these initiatives.  This approach will allow individual states to craft unique and creative solutions to meet the demands of their schools.
We will encourage states to reduce the over-reliance on high-stakes quantitative testing, to avoid the perverse outcomes associated with “teaching to the test,” in favor of more comprehensive assessment tools to evaluate student progress.
Support the Rights of Teachers to Collectively Bargain. In recent years, we have seen the positive impact of teachers working together to advocate for increased pay and increased support for the students they teach.  The Patrick Administration will affirm and secure the rights of teachers across this country to join a union and collectively bargain for salary, benefits and improved the working conditions in our public schools.
Close the Opportunity Gap
Closing Opportunity Gaps in Massachusetts
Closing opportunity gaps between poor students, students with special needs or English language learners and their peers was a top priority for Governor Patrick while in office
Governor Patrick signed the Achievement Gap Act, a groundbreaking education reform bill to transform public schools in Massachusetts and provide educators and districts with new tools and supports to target the opportunity gap and lift up all students.
Thanks to these efforts, the gap in four-year graduation rates between white and black students closed by nearly a third from 2006 to 2015. Other gaps were similarly reduced.
Growing up in Chicago, the schools that my family and I attended had significantly fewer resources than those just a few neighborhoods away.  A combination of new investments, targeted incentives, and structural changes will give states and communities the tools they need to make sure every child has the opportunity to thrive.  To make sure that a child’s neighborhood does not determine the quality of education they receive, my administration will: 
Expand Federal Support
Across our diverse country, there are many instances of local communities successfully adopting different resources and tools in order to support the needs of their students and begin to close the opportunity gap.
In Massachusetts, I signed legislation that created the state’s first-ever innovation schools, in-district schools provided with additional autonomy and flexibility in how students are educated together with additional resources and related accountability.
Through a multi-fold increase in Title I funds, I will work with states and cities to pair new investment with the adoption of innovation schools and other similar successful models that provide schools the additional tools they need to close opportunity gaps. Under our plan, schools will be able to use the additional autonomy and funding to invest in longer school days, smaller class sizes, after-school programs, and school-based social services for students and their families.
Incentivize New Frameworks for Local Support
All states rely, in some part, on local property tax revenue to fund public education.  Property taxes can be a stable source of funding, less vulnerable to economic disruption than other sources of revenue.  However, reliance on this source of revenue benefits school districts with higher property values and is limited where homeowners may have valuable property but no or limited income.  Our administration will incentivize local school districts and states to explore other more sustainable and progressive ways to support public education equitably across communities.
Invest in School Infrastructure
Today, the internet is a basic requirement for students to gain access to digital content and tools that will prepare them for success in the 21st century.  Under-resourced school districts, particularly in rural communities, struggle to provide internet access to their students.  In the past, the federal government has specifically allocated a segment of the broadband spectrum for educational use, creating a potential resource for school districts looking to provide internet access for their students.  Recently, the Trump Administration ended this allocation and opened up these broadband licenses for commercial use.  Our plan will reallocate a portion of the broadband spectrum for educational purposes and work with rural communities to mobilize this resource.  Additionally, our plan will include new investments for schools to build the infrastructure necessary to support new technology and digital resources. 
End the School to Prison Pipeline
We must interrupt the pipeline leading students from schools to incarceration.  I will task the Education Department with leading efforts to end zero-tolerance discipline policies in public schools.  We will work with states to limit the role of police in school discipline, and reduce the reliance on invasive surveillance systems in schools except where necessary for student security.
Affordable, Meaningful Higher Education
Higher education costs too much to serve as the runway to opportunity that we need it to be.  A Patrick Administration would set the country on a path to achieving affordable, debt-free post-secondary education for every American who wishes to pursue it.  The solution involves putting the “public” back into higher education, by supporting and strengthening public institutions of higher learning, and putting pressure on the private market to start pushing tuition and costs down. 
Making College Affordable
In a Patrick Administration, our priority will be to ensure that every student who wants to attend college is able to do so and graduate from a public college or university without burdensome debt.  To achieve this goal, our plan reduces tuition costs, rewards those who have given a year or more of national or military service, and increases aid for low-income students. 
The Department of Education will partner with states to make all community colleges tuition free. 
Under our plan, the federal government will offer states matching funds for the majority of the average cost per student of enrollment at a community college. In exchange for the federal funds, states will cover the remaining per student costs, so that students can enroll in these schools, tuition free.
Any student who gives a year or more of national military or civilian service — a paid program we have proposed as part of the Democracy Agenda — would be given as many years of free tuition and fees at a public college or university through a direct federal grant.
Relief for Existing Student Borrowers
We must address the crisis of student debt.  For too many young Americans, student debt has become a barrier to financial stability.  There are some important steps we can take today to alleviate the pain on current borrowers. 
For students overburdened by student debt today, we should at a minimum refinance their debt to eliminate or substantially reduce the interest. Our plan would allow borrowers to refinance retroactively and credit excess interest paid against the principal balance.  For many students, this will effectively eliminate their existing debt.
The federal government should also provide immediate relief to students who were taken advantage of by predatory, for-profit institutions, as well as students who have committed to public service. We will prioritize a comprehensive review of federal loan forgiveness programs to ensure that graduates receive clear and accurate information about eligibility and payback terms.
Going forward, through new legislation and regulation, we will require radically simplified student loan products, and, going forward, require loan services to provide students with up-front transparency and regular, flat payments. 
Endow Historically Black Colleges and Universities
America’s Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) and other minority serving institutions (MSIs) have served as an important gateway to opportunity and prosperity for people of color for generations.  They are engines of opportunity.  HBCUs have awarded nearly a quarter of all bachelor’s degrees awarded to black students in STEM since 2000.
Because public HBCUs are more dependent on public funding than non-HBCUs and private HBCUs are more tuition dependent than their non-HBCU counter parts, the increased costs of higher-education and cuts in public funding have led to significant financial challenges at many of these institutions.
In order to ensure these institutions have the financial resources they need to educate generations to come, the Patrick Administration will support a federal program, in addition to current federal and state expenditures, to seed the endowments of these institutions. This program will help secure long-term financial stability for these critical institutions.
Lifelong Training, Learning, and Enrichment
Working with states, local communities, community colleges, and the private sector, our administration will develop apprenticeship and lifelong skills programs to open up new career paths and skills for working adults that are flexible, portable and stackable.  The old model of going to school when you’re young to learn a single set of skills you can use throughout your career has been gone for decades, but our education and workforce development system has failed to keep pace with the rapidly changing economy.  We will target the chronically underemployed, just as we offer programming for those transitioning careers and those just starting out.
We will dramatically overhaul existing worker training programs to:
Support Experimentation, Testing and Accountability in Training. We need to better understand what works and what no longer does in workforce training and development, and target the strongest, most scalable programs with more resources. 
Community Colleges. Our community colleges remain underutilized in many places as sites for expanding opportunity and mobility.  My administration will put them at the center of workforce training and development, partnering with local employers, unions, trade groups, and other stakeholders so that there is a direct connection between the skills taught in the classroom and the skills demanded in the local marketplace. 
Dramatically Increase Competitive Workforce Training Grants. No single training model will work for every worker in every industry.  We will create new incentives to experiment with new workforce training models including private training and work-study programs at a local scale.  Set up processes to rigorously evaluate what works for specific industries and types of workers, given local conditions.  As different models prove successful, roll them out first to similar communities in other states and, if applicable, nationwide.
Align Transitional Support. The federal government currently operates a patchwork of programs that varies based on how or why a worker is unemployed or transitioning to a new industry, like the Trade Adjustment Assistance (TAA) program and others.  We should make all transition programs available to all workers, whether they are forced to change industries because of trade, automation, or otherwise.   Our economy is dynamic and constantly shifting—we need workforce programs that are just as flexible.
Standardize Credentials. My administration will lead the effort to make certificate programs and online skills training standardized, stackable, and portable, so students have confidence in the quality and relevance of the training they’re undertaking.  We will work closer with educators, employers, unions, and trade groups to identify the appropriate credentials and allow students to transition between flexible learning environments while earning credits recognized both by industry and schools.
Expand Apprenticeship Opportunities. We will increase federal support for apprenticeship programs, through which workers are able to earn pay while building market-ready skills and making progress towards a degree, certification, or the equivalent.  We should ensure that apprenticeship programs in high-demand industries are within reach of all Americans, while fostering sectoral and multi-firm programs like the Industrial Manufacturing Technician program, which receives funding from the Department of Labor.  Many of these sectoral programs allow small businesses to take part as well.
Develop New Career Pathway Incentives. My administration will support pilots in career pathway incentives for employers and workers who achieve milestones and advance on a career ladder in high-need industries, such as healthcare, education, and clean tech.  This can include both temporary federal wage support for workers who are forced to transition into a new industry late in their career or refundable tax credits to help workers who take on additional training and certifications.  For example, an entry-level medical assistant could be eligible for cash bonuses from the government for advancing to becoming a clinical care technician to registered nurse in markets of high-need.
Support Students and Workers During Training. Many students and workers receiving new training—especially mid-career, part-time, and adult learners—struggle to complete their programs, even when the program is well-designed and well-suited to their career ambitions.  We should provide the wraparound services required to improve retention and the advising and placement support required to improve the impact of the program. 
We will expand partnerships with nonprofits working to prepare young people for their first career, and older American transitioning into new careers.  For many learners, having access to childcare or affordable transportation, or having the ability to work while enrolled or take time-off without penalty, can be the difference dropping out and completing the program.  In all of our workforce training programs, we should include a greater say for workers themselves, so that they have more control over what training they receive and the way it is delivered.
Support Deval's Campaign
Only with the dedication of supporters like you, can we build a movement. Will you make a contribution to get our campaign off to a strong start?
$25
$50
$100
$500
$1000
Other
