Universal Access to Affordable Health Care
Governor Patrick is committed to delivering a health plan for every American.
The best way to get there is with a public option that builds on the Affordable Care Act (ACA), one that is free to some and low cost to others, and that could even be modeled on Medicare. And we will engage a broad coalition of stakeholders, from health providers and policymakers to patient advocates and labor to refine and propose improvements as we learn — the very formula that made it possible in Massachusetts to deliver health insurance to nearly 99% of Massachusetts residents.
Under our plan no one will be at risk of receiving a surprise bill or being forced into bankruptcy due to costs associated with a medical need.
We will build on the ACA to deliver real reform to fix a largely broken healthcare system — lowering drug prices, expanding mental health coverage, and reversing the Republican erosion of Medicare and Medicaid. Our guiding focus will be to help American families thrive — not merely to achieve a political slogan or check a box.
Health Care Results
Under Governor Patrick’s leadership, Massachusetts led the nation in health care coverage — with almost 99% of residents covered. An even higher percentage of children are covered.
In 2012, the Patrick Administration passed and implemented landmark legislation to contain health care costs.
As a direct result of the reforms in that legislation, health care costs in Massachusetts are rising at half the national rate.
The Patrick Administration took significant steps to improve access to mental health services, including strengthening insurance coverage parity protections, opening “Mental Health Courts” to divert individuals with mental illness from the criminal justice system, and allowing more people to access behavioral health care in their communities.
 
Expand Access to Public Healthcare Plans
Every American deserves access to affordable healthcare. My administration will work with Congress to create a robust and accessible public option to compete with private plans modeled on Medicare. Such an option will be affordable to working families and free for the poor. Just like other options on the health insurance exchanges, the public option will meet the minimum coverage standards, so no American will go without essential health benefits. And we will expand those standards, so families have access to coverage for behavioral health, substance abuse disorder, and dental care.
My administration will roll out a step-by-step administrative plan, supplemented where necessary by legislation, to create a public option based on Medicare. We will:
Improve and build on Medicare, enhancing dental, mental health, and substance abuse coverage, and capping out-of-pocket costs;
Merge Medicaid into Medicare, eliminating work requirements and enabling all citizens in all states immediate access to affordable care;
Increase support for enrollment marketing and mechanisms to make sure that every American is covered by an affordable private plan or a strong public one; and
Expand the tax credits and subsidies available to low-income individuals to make health plans affordable.
Reduce the Cost of Care
As Governor, I signed groundbreaking legislation in Massachusetts to help crack the code on ever-increasing costs in the health care system. As President, I will continue the fight to manage down the cost of good health care by focusing on the broken features of our system.
Control High-Cost Drug Prices. We will work with Congress and the private sector to provide the government new leverage in negotiating drug prices, through a combination of increased negotiating flexibility and new standards — without compromising the industry’s ability to innovate. All involved parties need to come to the table with solutions that don’t come at the expense of the consumer. That’s why, as President, I will support legislation that empowers the federal government to negotiate prices for common drugs and high cost new-to-market drugs. Drug companies will need to prove the drug’s value and establish a mechanism for determining return.
Public vs. Private Competition. The public option will be more cost effective to the government and affordable to consumers. The competitive tension between the private and public systems will force insurers to reduce the cost of insurance, and improve offerings overall. Our administration will push for transparency in hospital pricing and insurer reimbursements, to drive competition and lower overall cost.
Control Cost Growth. As Governor of Massachusetts, I introduced and signed legislation that successfully slowed the rapid growth of health care costs in Massachusetts. I intend to introduce a similar health care cost growth benchmark to Congress based on health care expenditure data and tied to Gross Domestic Product. These measures will build and expand on the work we did in Massachusetts, where it has yielded results.
End Surprise Billing. No one receiving needed care should be faced with unexpected, high cost bill when receiving care at a hospital. I support legislative proposals to limit surprise billing while ensuring that providers receive adequate payment for services they provide. We can, and should, learn from providers that have voluntarily adopted such reforms, and include a fair process for resolving disputes between providers and insurers.
Research and Innovate. Our administration will support evidence-based experimentation in the field to find solutions to drive down costs — exploring innovations like new models for community health centers, innovations in telemedicine, and other strategies to make care more local, personal and timely.
Expand Obamacare’s Successes; Fix its Weaknesses
The Trump Administration’s attempt to de-fund and destroy Obamacare is eroding the path to creating a healthier America. Within hours of assuming the Presidency, I will reverse the government’s legal position in the lawsuits attempting to strip care from millions of Americans. As President, I will simplify access and expand capacity, while driving down system costs.
Pre-Existing Conditions. Insurance companies should not be able to discriminate against someone who has already been diagnosed with an illness or disorder.
Young Adults. We will defend provisions of the ACA requiring insurers to permit young adults to claim dependent status until the age of 26.
 
Improve and Integrate Mental Health Care
There are profound and widespread unmet mental health care needs in our healthcare system and our nation at large. Our administration will prioritize addressing this gap, working with insurers, providers and advocates to improve both access and capacity.
We cannot provide appropriate care without eliminating the stigma that has traditionally accompanied mental health disorder diagnoses. As President, I will lead a nationwide effort to change the way we talk and think about treating mental health disorders, and bring light to where there are currently shadows. We will do the hard work of improving the quality of mental health care coverage, and integrating it with physical care options.
Other mental health care policy priorities include:
Enforce Parity. We will enforce the mental health parity law, which prohibits most health plans from imposing less favorable benefit limitations on mental health/substance use disorder benefits than on physical care benefits.
Expand Capacity. Recruiting and supporting a mental health care workforce to provide appropriate care is essential to renewing our system of mental health care. From primary care providers and across the full range of health care professionals, we will redouble efforts to attract, retain, and train the appropriate level of mental health care talent — especially in rural communities. This means, among other things, increasing training options, expanding loan forgiveness programs to health care providers other than doctors, and advancing targeted efforts to recruit health care providers from minority and underrepresented backgrounds.
Expand Access. As we expand Medicare and stand up the public option, we will ensure that mental health care is among the “essential health benefits” that private and public insurers are required to provide covered individuals.
Data Integration. We will initiate a regulatory review of the federal policies that govern confidentiality of patient information to ensure data can be shared when appropriate which will vastly improve service delivery.
Services Integration. We will work with mental health providers and payers in developing legislation that integrates the payment of primary care and behavioral health services, including the breakdown of the physical separation of mental and primary health care providers.
Eliminating Stigma. Negative association with mental illness or substance abuse disorder are very common among health care providers and employers, which can make it harder to seek help. My administration will work to develop national guidelines and best practices to help employers create work environments that foster wellness and open dialogue about depression, burnout and other issues that are frequently misunderstood or ignored.
Combating the Opioid Crisis
The crisis of substance use disorders in our communities is primarily a public health challenge to be dealt with by health professionals — not by the criminal justice system.
The states need more resources and better, sustained coordination from the federal government, prioritizing access to treatment. We will work with states and Congress to deploy and organize the medicines, social workers, community leaders, mental and emotional health counselors needed to conquer addiction and stabilize lives. At the same time, we need tougher controls on the availability and tracking of prescription opioids, accountability for manufacturers who wrongfully downplayed the risks of prescription drugs, and rigorous oversight of the for-profit recovery industry.
Results
Well before the opioid crisis became a feature of the national conversation, Governor Patrick’s administration was at the forefront of tackling the epidemic in Massachusetts and across the New England region.
Governor Patrick was among the first governors in the nation to issue a declaration establishing that the opioid crisis was a public health emergency.
Under Governor Patrick’s leadership, Massachusetts approached the challenge as a public health crisis — not a criminal justice one. Governor Patrick took emergency steps to ban dangerous prescription narcotics that were worsening the problem and provide first responders with access to life-saving drugs like Narcan.
The Patrick Administration established a regional New England working group to coordinate efforts to address the epidemic. And Massachusetts’ state health agencies took immediate steps to coordinate with the medical professionals, first responders, and insurers to ensure a continuum of care and comprehensive support.
Support and Enable a Public Health Response. As President, I will work with Congress to establish a new infusion of support for communities, health centers, and nonprofit groups on the frontlines of the epidemic. I will push for and support the expansion of Medicaid and other additional funding sources to the states, and:
Work with local decision-makers and substance use disorder experts to make sure that resources are being deployed on the ground in the most efficient and comprehensive way;
Scale up and expand a national Prescription Drug Monitoring Program to track and understand opioid prescription patterns;
Boost federal opioid awareness efforts, and target resources on early intervention; and
Introduce new controls on exploitative for-profit recovery centers, support appropriate law enforcement training and efforts to decriminalize substance abuse disorders, and take steps to collect richer data on the epidemic that will improve our ability to respond in real time.
Insurance Mandates. We will vigorously enforce federal parity laws mandating insurance coverage for mental health and substance use, and require insurance providers to remove unnecessary obstacles to getting the appropriate medications to individuals suffering from addiction.
Ensuring Reproductive Freedom
Government should stay out of the most intimate personal health care choices that a person can make — including whether or not to have an abortion. Abortion access is health care. Our administration will push back against efforts by states to make it harder to access abortion and other forms of Constitutionally-protected reproductive health care. We will work to make sure that all Americans, in every part of the country, have access to safe, affordable reproductive care. And we will work to make sure that a person’s right to make intimate health choices is free from government interference.
Reproductive Justice Track Record
Governor Patrick has long supported the right of individuals to access adequate reproductive health care, including access to abortions.
In 2014, Governor Patrick passed a law that allowed police to disperse groups that were blocking access to abortion clinics.
As the Assistant Attorney General in the Clinton administration, Patrick prosecuted abortion clinic violence.
In the 1990s, Patrick was on the Board of Directors for the Planned Parenthood League of Massachusetts and was honored in 2012 to be recognized by Planned Parenthood for his steadfast support for the vital work done to protect reproductive freedom.
Codify Roe v. Wade. Work with Congress to pass a federal law that parallels Roe v. Wade and codifies in law the full range of Roe’s Constitutional protections.
Support and Expand Access to Health Care. Our administration will:
Restore and expand fully Title X family planning funding to Planned Parenthood and other clinics, which offer a range of critical health care services;
Repeal, and refuse to re-sign, the Hyde Amendment, which prevents abortion coverage under federally funded health plans;
Rescind the “Mexico City policy” that limits our ability to support global health efforts overseas;
Ban federal money from going to so-called “crisis pregnancy centers,”
Support efforts to expand access to medicated abortion and telehealth options to address the lack of access to services in some states and rural areas;
Direct the Education and Health and Human Services Departments to coordinate on reproductive justice issues, awareness, and minors’ access to reproductive healthcare; and
Protect and expand federal laws requiring that insurers cover abortion and contraception access.
Support Deval's Campaign
Only with the dedication of supporters like you, can we build a movement. Will you make a contribution to get our campaign off to a strong start?
$25
$50
$100
$500
$1000
Other
BACK TO DEVALS VISION
