Thriving Veterans, Service Members, and Military Families
As a nation, we have few obligations more vital than our duty to ensure that those who have served in the military have access to appropriate care and the ability to prosper when they return to civilian life.
We will seek out and invest in new strategies to integrate the rich experiences and talents of veterans into our economy and our communities. Our all-volunteer force is rooted in a can-do culture: it is a small, highly-trained, highly-effective force operating in some of the most challenging conditions in the world. Veterans of such a force are a national treasure, and the services we provide in return must reflect our appreciation for what they have done and our understanding of what, through their education, experience, and talent, they can still contribute.
Under my leadership, Massachusetts became a model for supporting veterans of all ages, from all walks of life. We supplied tuition waivers at state colleges and universities in support of a robust and paid for education for service members. We expanded the women veterans’ network, suicide prevention efforts, substance use prevention efforts, and opportunities for housing, and partnered with industry to provide access to jobs for those returning home.
We must do all of that, and much more, at the federal level, while also ensuring appropriate, consistent care and opportunities for servicemembers and their families.
Nation-Leading Results for Veterans
Under Governor Patrick’s leadership, Massachusetts led the nation in Veterans’ Services. In the final year of Governor Patrick’s Administration, Massachusetts spent more than twice as much resources per veteran as the next leading state.
Governor Patrick also led an aggressive employment campaign to increase hiring of Massachusetts veterans in the private sector, and in state government. The Patrick Administration partnered with the business community and more than doubled the value of Hiring Incentive Training Grants to employers for newly hired military veterans.
Under Governor Patrick’s leadership, Massachusetts established a first-in-the-nation Veteran Web Portal that linked to hundreds of easily searchable benefits and programs for veterans.
Governor Patrick re-established the Governor’s Advisory Council on Veterans’ Services to provide a voice for veterans in the Executive Branch, reduced veteran homelessness by 30%, and ensured that every town in Massachusetts had a Veterans Affairs Officer.
Under Governor Patrick, Massachusetts took steps to adapt services to meet the needs of a new generation of veterans, including the expansion of the state’s Women’s Veterans Network.
Affordable, Comprehensive Health Care for Veterans. As we expand access to affordable, quality health care to all Americans, we will make special efforts to ensure that every veteran has access to the care of her or his choice, either through the VA, a private plan, or a public option when appropriate.
Reform and Renew the Veterans Affairs System
We should be proud of the care we currently offer. The VA system provides our veterans with access to world-class care, and the service it provides consistently ranks high in patient satisfaction. But the agency is burdened by deteriorating physical infrastructure, was neglected from prior administrations, and has been plagued by consistent management issues. Wait times continue to be a challenge. Response to needs has become characterized by a culture of “no.” As President, I will renew the commitment to mission and focus at the VA, by providing adequate funding, support at the highest level, needed reforms, and a culture of “yes.”
Right the Balance Between Public and Private. In principle, there is nothing wrong with having private sector options for veterans and their dependents. We will find the right balance of VA and purchased care by conducting a thorough assessment, led by the Secretary of Veterans Affairs in conjunction with a White House official tasked with coordinating the Defense Department and the VA, acknowledging the different needs of veterans across different regions of the country. We will expand private health care options only as appropriate and until such time that wait times, access, and quality through the VA are no longer an issue.
Streamline Access. As we did in Massachusetts, we will work to accommodate the needs of a new generation of veterans and streamline access to service for veterans, through online tools and mobile apps. We must prioritize the current project to marry VA and Department of Defense records, as well as require the Department to enroll all eligible veterans in the VA system prior to their separation from service.
Health IT Improvements. We will work to ensure that veterans’ medical records must be shared securely, with permission, and with ease. This is critically important as our veteran populations continue to age. Those in the VA system, nursing homes, or seeing multiple providers need to have peace of mind that the process of sharing their records will occur, so they can focus on their own health.
Expand Capacity. We must recruit a new generation of care providers, particularly mental health providers. In recent months, the VA has operated with tens of thousands of vacancies, vastly constraining its ability to deliver on its mission. We will partner with providers and teaching hospital to expand the clinical pipeline, greatly increase recruitment efforts, closing the thousands of vacancies and, as necessary, increase salaries for the VA practitioners to recruit more professionals.
Management and Accountability. Refine and invest in new management and accountability tools at the VA to govern and track every penny, in order to have metrics on successes and areas to improve upon.
Footprint Review. Undertake a comprehensive capital and facilities review of the VA, to determine which facilities need modernization. We will seek funding to rebuild outdated VA infrastructure and provide decades long fixes to VA facilities whose repairs have been deferred for far too long, particularly in rural areas.
Mental Health and Suicide Prevention
For veterans and current servicemembers, we must dramatically expand access to mental health services. For veterans, this means making it much easier to see a mental health professional at the VA. This, in turn, requires us to fund and recruit many more professionals, and establish a mental health services hotline. For current members of the armed forces, the Department of Defense should offer, and potentially require, annual mental health check-ups.
We will create a national peer-to-peer outreach effort for veterans modeled on the Massachusetts Statewide Advocacy for Veterans Empowerment (SAVE). The program will offer peer-to-peer support, suicide prevention, and outreach to homeless combat veterans.
The scope of the challenge is greater than what government alone can solve. We will partner with the private sector and nonprofits like the Home Base program in Massachusetts to leverage best practices in the field, identify new solutions, and extend the umbrella of care to all veterans.
We must do more to divert veterans with mental health disorders out of the criminal justice system, by supporting innovations like veteran treatment courts.
There is far too little medical research into the best strategies for preventing suicide among veterans. We will fund and support new investments into suicide prevention, and deploy those solutions as fast as possible.
Support the Transition to Civilian Life
We, as a nation, must take the necessary steps to set servicemembers up for success. Together, we can provide additional tools so they can thrive and continue to serve in new ways.
Local Veteran Experts. To aid with the transition to civilian life and help veterans access the services, we will establish a national network of local veterans’ services offices to match veterans with resources. Building on a model that succeeded in Massachusetts, we would offer incentives, trainings, and grants to encourage this level of support, so all who wish can receive the benefits they have earned for their service.
Supplier Diversity. We will support increased federal benefits and procurement set-asides for Service-Disabled Veteran Owned Small Businesses, allowing veterans to gain access to contracts for public projects in the areas of construction, design and goods and services procurement.
Reintegration Incentives and Transition Programs. Our administration will push for new progressive tax incentives for employers that hire, train, and retain veterans or for veteran-owned businesses, as well as other programs that prioritize hiring for veterans and their spouses. These incentives could be nationwide or targeted at the specific regions, communities, and populations that would benefit most. Our administration will support and build on preexisting and successful transition programs, such as Hiring Our Heroes.
Higher Education. Our administration will partner with institutions of higher education to strengthen the pipeline for returning military members. We will work with colleges and universities to take steps like accepting military experience as credit to help veterans transition into students.
Utilize Existing Hubs. We will strengthen the preference veterans receive for services at all of the nation’s federally funded Career Centers. Military installations across the nation are often hubs for the veteran communities. A nationwide program to enhance the offerings at these sites and serve as places for veterans to network and receive care will help.
End Veteran Homelessness. We will coordinate across the administration offering services such as block grants for transitional housing to ensure no veteran goes homeless.
Supporting Military Families
Military families shoulder a unique burden associated with military service. Our administration will address those needs in a comprehensive, global effort.
Military Housing. Our military housing stock has not been adequately maintained, and too many families are forced to reside in poorly constructed homes. We will conduct a comprehensive review of all military housing options, and direct new funding to revitalize and improve service member housing.
Opportunities for Military Spouses. We cannot continue to squander the vast potential of military spouses, who often find it hard to find opportunities to put their talents to use. The federal government can do much more to establish additional guidelines to assist servicemembers, veterans, and their spouses with professional licenses so they can more easily prepare for, transfer from other states to, and apply for jobs.
Affordable Child Care. The lack of fair and equitable support our nation’s government provides to families seeking affordable child care is a crisis. Many simply cannot afford the childcare they need, whether they are looking to join the workforce, are caring for an aging family member, or have other reasons to require childcare. We will work with Congress to invest in early child education and childcare vouchers for military families in order to address this critical gap.
Military Child Education. The transition between schools for the children of military families comes with great challenges. Government can and must make it easier. Massachusetts joined the Interstate Compact on Educational Opportunity for Military Children during my administration, which represents an important start. As President, I will bring together the Departments of Defense and Education to accelerate recent progress and commit to incremental funding increases and partnerships to support children.
Support Deval's Campaign
Only with the dedication of supporters like you, can we build a movement. Will you make a contribution to get our campaign off to a strong start?
$25
$50
$100
$500
$1000
Other
BACK TO DEVALS VISION
