Issues
Empower the People of Puerto Rico
Now is the time to rebuild Puerto Rico. I want the people of Puerto Rico to know that they are not forgotten, that they are not alone, and that we will do everything we possibly can to rebuild the island.
Key Points
Repair the damage from Hurricanes Irma and Maria and rebuild Puerto Rico
Give the territory the debt relief it so desperately needs to rebuild with dignity.
Ensure a strong social safety net for the people of Puerto Rico by ensuring access to health care, nutrition assistance, veterans benefits, and quality public schools.
Details
For too long, the people of Puerto Rico have faced inadequate assistance and colonial exploitation in the wake of natural disasters, a decade-long crippling economic crisis, and unjust human suffering. At a time of unprecedented challenges for Puerto Rico, the next president must work to empower Puerto Rican leaders, communities, and advocates. When we are in the White House, we will:
Finally repair the damage from Hurricanes Irma and Maria and rebuild Puerto Rico. It is unconscionable that in the wealthiest nation in the world we have allowed our fellow citizens to suffer for so long. The full resources of the United States must be brought to bear on this crisis, for as long as necessary.
Restore self-rule in Puerto Rico by ending the reign of greedy Wall Street vulture funds that have a stranglehold on Puerto Rico’s future, return control of the island to the people of Puerto Rico, and give the territory the debt relief it so desperately needs to rebuild with dignity.
Ensure a strong social safety net for the people of Puerto Rico by ensuring access to health care, nutrition assistance, veterans benefits, and quality public schools.
Sign Up
This is your movement.
No one candidate, not even the greatest candidate you could imagine, is capable of taking on Donald Trump and the billionaire class alone. There is only one way we win — and that is together. Add your name to tell Bernie you’re in!
Mobile alerts from Bernie 2020. Periodic messages. Bernie 2020 will never charge for these updates, but carrier message & data rates may apply. Text STOP to 67760 to stop receiving messages. Text HELP to 67760 for more information. Terms & Conditions
Learn
Meet Bernie
Issues
Hear The Bern
En Español
Organize
Volunteer
Contribute
Events
Store
Social Media
Facebook
Twitter
YouTube
Instagram
About
Jobs
Accessibility
Privacy Policy
Taxes
Diversity
Contact Us
Paid For By Bernie 2020
(not the billionaires)
Bernie 2020
PO Box 391
Burlington, VT 05402
© Bernie 2020
Paid For By Bernie 2020
(not the billionaires)
