Issues
Get Big Money Out of Politics and Restore Democracy
Together, we are going to create a political system which is based on the democratic principles of one person - one vote - and end a corrupt system which allows billionaires to buy elections. Yes. We are going to overturn Citizens United, move to public funding of elections.
Key Points
Restore the Voting Rights Act and overturn Citizens United.
End racist voter suppression and partisan gerrymandering.
Make Election Day a national holiday, secure automatic voter registration, and guarantee the right to vote for every American over 18, including those Americans currently incarcerated and those disenfranchised by a felony conviction.
Abolish super PACs and replace corporate funding with publicly funded elections that amplify small-doner donations.
Details
We have seen what happens when corporations and billionaires control our system of government to protect their own profit and greed. The era of Wall Street billionaires controlling our government and elections must come to an end, and we must take back our democracy for the American people. Every American, regardless of income and race, must have the freedom to exercise their constitutional right to vote. To make sure every voter counts, we must:
Restore the Voting Rights Act.
Secure automatic voter registration for every American over 18.
Overturn Citizens United.
End racist voter suppression and partisan gerrymandering.
Abolish burdensome voter ID laws.
Re-enfranchise the more than 6 million Americans who have had their right to vote taken away by a felony conviction, paid their debt to society, and deserve to have their rights restored.
Make Election Day a national holiday.
Abolish super PACs.
Replace corporate funding and donations from millionaires and billionaires with public funding of elections that amplifies small-dollar donations.
Sign Up
This is your movement.
No one candidate, not even the greatest candidate you could imagine, is capable of taking on Donald Trump and the billionaire class alone. There is only one way we win — and that is together. Add your name to tell Bernie you’re in!
Mobile alerts from Bernie 2020. Periodic messages. Bernie 2020 will never charge for these updates, but carrier message & data rates may apply. Text STOP to 67760 to stop receiving messages. Text HELP to 67760 for more information. Terms & Conditions
Learn
Meet Bernie
Issues
Hear The Bern
En Español
Organize
Volunteer
Contribute
Events
Store
Social Media
Facebook
Twitter
YouTube
Instagram
About
Jobs
Accessibility
Privacy Policy
Taxes
Diversity
Contact Us
Paid For By Bernie 2020
(not the billionaires)
Bernie 2020
PO Box 391
Burlington, VT 05402
© Bernie 2020
Paid For By Bernie 2020
(not the billionaires)
