Issues
Gun Safety
When we are in the White House, we will move aggressively to end the epidemic of gun violence in this country and pass the common sense gun safety legislation that the overwhelming majority of Americans want.
Key Points
Take on the NRA and its corrupting effect on Washington.
Expand background checks.
End the gun show loophole. All gun purchases should be subject to the same background check standards.
Ban the sale and distribution of assault weapons. Assault weapons are designed and sold as tools of war. There is absolutely no reason why these firearms should be sold to civilians.
Prohibit high-capacity ammunition magazines.
Implement a buyback program to get assault weapons off the streets.
Regulate assault weapons in the same way that we currently regulate fully automatic weapons — a system that essentially makes them unlawful to own.
Crack down on “straw purchases” where people buy guns for criminals.
Support “red flag” laws and legislation to ensure we keep guns out of the hands of domestic abusers and stalkers
Ban the 3-D printing of firearms and bump stocks
Details
We face an epidemic of gun violence in this country. A significant majority of Americans want commonsense gun reform. But the NRA, now a full-fledged, right-wing political organization, spends millions on TV and internet ads attacking candidates who dare to stand up for what voters want. We must:
Take on the NRA and its corrupting effect on Washington. The NRA has become a partisan lobbying public-relations entity for gun manufacturers, and its influence must be stopped.
Expand background checks.
End the gun show loophole. All gun purchases should be subject to the same background check standards.
Ban the sale and distribution of assault weapons. Assault weapons are designed and sold as tools of war. There is absolutely no reason why these firearms should be sold to civilians.
Prohibit high-capacity ammunition magazines.
Crack down on “straw purchases” where people buy guns for criminals.
Sign Up
This is your movement.
No one candidate, not even the greatest candidate you could imagine, is capable of taking on Donald Trump and the billionaire class alone. There is only one way we win — and that is together. Add your name to tell Bernie you’re in!
Mobile alerts from Bernie 2020. Periodic messages. Bernie 2020 will never charge for these updates, but carrier message & data rates may apply. Text STOP to 67760 to stop receiving messages. Text HELP to 67760 for more information. Terms & Conditions
Learn
Meet Bernie
Issues
Hear The Bern
En Español
Organize
Volunteer
Contribute
Events
Store
Social Media
Facebook
Twitter
YouTube
Instagram
About
Jobs
Accessibility
Privacy Policy
Taxes
Diversity
Contact Us
Paid For By Bernie 2020
(not the billionaires)
Bernie 2020
PO Box 391
Burlington, VT 05402
© Bernie 2020
Paid For By Bernie 2020
(not the billionaires)
